A&A 609, A90 (2018)
DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731484
c(cid:13) ESO 2018

Astronomy
&Astrophysics

Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

Photometric signatures, implications for transmission spectroscopy, and search

in Kepler data

D. Alp1 and B.-O. Demory2

1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

e-mail: dalp@kth.se

2 Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland

e-mail: brice.demory@csh.unibe.ch

Received 30 June 2017 / Accepted 27 October 2017

ABSTRACT

Context. Refraction deﬂects photons that pass through atmospheres, which aﬀects transit light curves. Refraction thus provides an
avenue to probe physical properties of exoplanet atmospheres and to constrain the presence of clouds and hazes. In addition, an
eﬀective surface can be imposed by refraction, thereby limiting the pressure levels probed by transmission spectroscopy.
Aims. The main objective of the paper is to model the eﬀects of refraction on photometric light curves for realistic planets and to
explore the dependencies on atmospheric physical parameters. We also explore under which circumstances transmission spectra are
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by refraction. Finally, we search for refraction signatures in photometric residuals in Kepler data.
Methods. We use the model of Hui & Seager (2002, ApJ, 572, 540) to compute deﬂection angles and refraction transit light curves,
allowing us to explore the parameter space of atmospheric properties. The observational search is performed by stacking large samples
of transit light curves from Kepler.
Results. We ﬁnd that out-of-transit refraction shoulders are the most easily observable features, which can reach peak amplitudes
of ∼10 parts per million (ppm) for planets around Sun-like stars. More typical amplitudes are a few ppm or less for Jovians and at
the sub-ppm level for super-Earths. In-transit, ingress, and egress refraction features are challenging to detect because of the short
timescales and degeneracies with other transit model parameters. Interestingly, the signal-to-noise ratio of any refraction residuals for
planets orbiting Sun-like hosts are expected to be similar for planets orbiting red dwarfs and ultra-cool stars. We also ﬁnd that the
maximum depth probed by transmission spectroscopy is not limited by refraction for weakly lensing planets, but that the incidence of
refraction can vary signiﬁcantly for strongly lensing planets. We ﬁnd no signs of refraction features in the stacked Kepler light curves,
which is in agreement with our model predictions.
Key words. planets and satellites: atmospheres

1. Introduction

The transit method is one of the most successful at ﬁnding
exoplanets, with thousands of detections by the Kepler mis-
sion (Koch et al. 2010) alone. Transit
light curves are typ-
ically modelled as planets occulting host stars with non-
uniform brightness proﬁles (Mandel & Agol 2002). Light curves
with higher photometric precision reveal additional eﬀects,
such as thermal emission from planets (e.g. Charbonneau et al.
2005; Demory et al. 2012) and reﬂected host star light (e.g.
Sudarsky et al. 2000; Demory 2014). Searches for rings and
moons have also been carried out (Hippke 2015; Kipping et al.
2015; Heller 2017). Further development of light-curve models
is therefore desirable in order to account for physical eﬀects that
were previously not included, especially on the verge of the com-
missioning of new facilities that will signiﬁcantly improve the
current photometric capabilities.

Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres, or “atmospheric lens-
ing”, was ﬁrst discussed by Seager & Sasselov (2000) and
Hubbard et al. (2001), who concluded that refraction is weak
at low pressures. Hui & Seager (2002) presented a model and
made the ﬁrst detailed study of the eﬀects of refraction and
oblateness on transit light curves. Sidis & Sari (2010) studied

refraction in the extreme case of a transparent planet and showed
that dips in light curves can be caused by refractive transpar-
ent planets. Bétrémieux & Kaltenegger (2015) provide analytic
expressions for the column density and deﬂection angle, and
make comparisons with a ray-tracing algorithm. Refraction in
exoplanet atmospheres have received increased attention over
the past few years and several authors have emphasised that re-
fraction can set the eﬀective planet radius (García Muñoz et al.
2012; Bétrémieux & Kaltenegger 2013, 2014). The implications
of the eﬀective surface depth due to refraction on transmis-
sion spectroscopy have also been studied (Bétrémieux 2016;
Bétrémieux & Swain 2017). Several authors have studied how
transmission spectra depend on transit phase and the possibil-
ity of using refraction to probe the atmospheric composition at
diﬀerent altitudes (Sidis & Sari 2010; García Muñoz et al. 2012;
Misra et al. 2014). Refraction signatures in photometric light
curves have been proposed by Misra & Meadows (2014) to serve
as an eﬃcient method of identifying clear skies. No attempt has
yet been made to detect refraction signals in observational data
despite the recent theoretical developments.

This paper studies the eﬀects of refraction on transit light
curves and how refraction signals depend on physical proper-
ties of exoplanet atmospheres. We compute the expected signal

Article published by EDP Sciences

A90, page 1 of 12

A&A 609, A90 (2018)

strengths and characteristics for a sample of planets. We then dis-
cuss the eﬀects of refraction on planetary transmission spectra.
We ﬁnally survey the complete Kepler primary mission dataset
to search for refraction features.

The paper is organised as follows. We describe the model and
suite of test planets in Sect. 2, and present model predictions in
Sect. 3. Observations and data reduction are detailed in Sect. 4,
and observational results are presented in Sect. 5. We discuss our
ﬁndings in Sect. 6, and summarise our conclusions in Sect. 7.

2. Model description

√

We use the following conventions and deﬁnitions: residuals are
deﬁned as ∆F = FR − FM, where FR is the normalised ob-
served or predicted model ﬂux and FM is the normalised ﬂux
of a ﬁtted model. All uncertainties are one standard deviation.
We parametrise the stellar surface brightness as I = 1− γ1 (1− ν)
− γ2 (1− ν)2, where γ1 and γ2 are the limb-darkening coeﬃcients
1 − r2 with r as radial distance from the stel-
(LDCs) and ν =
lar disc centre. The following parameter values are used unless
otherwise stated: an impact parameter of 0.5 stellar radii, a pho-
ton wavelength of 6500 Å, stellar radius equal to the solar value,
γ1 = 0.37, and γ2 = 0.27. The LDCs correspond to the solar val-
ues computed using the theoretical tables of Claret & Bloemen
(2011) in the Kepler bandpass.

2.1. Refraction model

Table 1. List of symbols (Hui & Seager 2002).

Symbol
kB
t
T
g
µ
mH
H
α
F
W
DOL
DLS
τ
R0
ρ0
θS ≡ (θ1
θI ≡ (θ1
θ∗

S, θ2
S)
I , θ2
I )

Meaning
Boltzmann constant
time
temperature
surface gravity
mean molecular weight
hydrogen atom mass
atmospheric scale height
refractive coeﬃcient
normalised ﬂux
occultation kernel
observer–lens (observer–planet) distance
lens–source (planet–star) distance
optical depth
planet radius
atmospheric mass density at R0
source position in the sky plane
image position in the sky plane
star-centre position in the sky plane

with parameters given by

H =
B ≡ 2α

kBT
gµmH
ρ0
H

,

DLSDOL
DOL + DLS

≈ 2α

ρ0
H

DLS,

(6)

(7)

We present in the following an outline of the atmospheric refrac-
tion transit light-curve model of Hui & Seager (2002), to which
the reader is referred for a rigorous derivation and comprehen-
sive description of the model. The model assumes isothermal
atmosphere in hydrostatic equilibrium and uniform vertical at-
mospheric composition. We note that a factor of two is missing
in Eq. (9) of Hui & Seager (2002), see our Eq. (4). We emphasise
that it is the absolute magnitude of the magniﬁcation (A) that en-
ters Eq. (1). Negative magniﬁcations signiﬁes that the image has
been spatially reversed, but only the photometric amplitude is
of interest for refraction light curves. Hui & Seager (2002) also
treat the eﬀects caused by oblateness of planets, but in this work
planets are assumed to be spherical. In this paper we use the no-
tation shown in Table 1, which is the same as the notation used
by Hui & Seager (2002). Let I(θS − θ∗(t)) be the surface bright-
ness of the star as a function of source position and star-centre
position and W(θI) be the occultation kernel of the planet disc,
which is 0 when the observed image position is within the planet
radius and 1 otherwise. Hui & Seager (2002) veriﬁed that the
step model was a good approximation to reality. Then, the equa-
tions describing atmospheric refraction become

1 + 2ψ + ψ2 + u2 ˜ψ(1 + ψ)

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

images

F(t) =

(cid:104)
A =
ψ(u) = −B

d2θS

(cid:114)
(cid:114)

u2 ˜ψ(u) = B
u2 ≡ (θ1
I )2 + (θ2
A90, page 2 of 12

πH

exp

(cid:34)
2uDOL
πuDOL
1 +
2H
I )2 = |θI|2;

|A| I(θS − θ∗(t)) W(θI)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
− uDOL − R0

− uDOL − R0
(cid:34)

(cid:105)−1
(cid:35)

H

H

exp

2uDOL

H

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(cid:35)

(cid:114)

1 −

and
C ≡ R0/H,
(8)
where the approximation DOL (cid:29) DLS in Eq. (7) holds for exo-
planet transits. The transit light curve is given by Eq. (1) and is
an integral over the stellar disc, which is treated as a ﬂat surface.
The quantities denoted by ψ and u2 ˜ψ can be thought of as lensing
potentials. The parameter B is essentially just a deﬂection angle
that has been scaled by a ratio of distances and C is the ratio of
binding energy to thermal energy.

Much of the physics is captured by the important parameters
B and C. Of particular importance is the dividing line between
strong and weak lensing

π
2C

B < 0,

(9)

where the system is strongly lensing if the condition is ful-
ﬁlled (Hui & Seager 2002). Strong lensing occurs when caustics
are present. Caustics are source positions for which the mag-
niﬁcation diverges (Hui & Seager 2002). A more intuitive and
equivalent condition for strong lensing is when photons can be
refracted into view by the far side of the planet. The far side
is where the image is closer to the planet centre than its source
position. A consequence of strong lensing is that the ﬂux can in-
crease above the baseline before and after transit. The baseline
refers to the out-of-transit ﬂux. The increase of ﬂux just outside
of transit will henceforth be referred to as “refraction shoulders”.
Importantly, the information contained in the B and C parame-
ters does not capture all the properties that could be connected to
the photometric signal strength. Importantly, refraction can ob-
scure atmospheric layers only if the planet is strongly lensing,
which is crucial for transmission spectroscopy (see Sect. 6.2).

Table 2. Physical, atmospheric, and orbital parameters for the test planets.

D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

Period Distance Mass

Radius Temp. Atm. composition

Planet

Earth
Super-Earth
Jupiter
Jovian
Jovian
Best-case

1 yr
80 d
12 yr
1 yr
20 d
12 yr

(R(cid:12))
215
78
1118
215
31
1118

1.0 M⊕
3.9 M⊕
1.0 MJ
1.0 MJ
1.0 MJ
1.0 MJ

1.0 R⊕
1.5 R⊕
1.0 RJ
1.0 RJ
1.0 RJ
1.0 RJ

(K)
255
423
150
342
901
600

0.78N2 + 0.22O2
0.78N2 + 0.22O2
0.86H2 + 0.14He
0.86H2 + 0.14He
0.86H2 + 0.14He

H2

α

(cm3 g−1)

0.23
0.23
1.22
1.22
1.22
1.54

H
(km)
7.4
7.1
21.7
49.4
130.1
98.5

B

C

23 048
7302
3059
171
6
351

859
1346
3276
1437
546
721

Notes. Atmospheric composition fractions are given by number. The 0.86H2 + 0.14He mixture for the Jovian planets is equivalent to 76% H2 and
24% He by mass, which is the atmospheric composition of Jupiter.

Other models for refraction have been published based on
a ray-tracing approach (García Muñoz et al. 2012; Bétrémieux
& Kaltenegger 2013, 2015; Misra et al. 2014), which implies
that the equivalent to the analytic expression for the magniﬁ-
cation in Eq. (2) needs to be determined numerically. This ap-
proach is computationally more demanding than the model of
Hui & Seager (2002), which only requires Eq. (1) to be com-
puted numerically. This is because the assumption of an atmo-
sphere that is isothermal in hydrostatic equilibrium and with
uniform vertical composition allows the use of an analytic ex-
pression in Eq. (2). We note that Misra & Meadows (2014) re-
ported that the assumption of an isothermal atmosphere results in
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence after testing realistic tropospheric lapse
rates and stratospheric temperature inversions using their ray-
tracing framework. Alternately, Sidis & Sari (2010) developed
a model that provides analytic approximations for the observed
ﬂux near and away from occultation, but at the cost of ignoring
limb darkening.

2.2. Test planets
We construct a suite of test planets for the analysis of refraction
transit light curves. Each planet is deﬁned by a set of parameters,
T, MP, R0, DLS, and atmospheric composition, where MP is the
planet mass and the remaining variables are deﬁned following
Hui & Seager (2002, Table 1). The atmospheric composition is
related to α by Cauchy’s equation (Appendix A). Let P be the or-
bital period, G the gravitational constant, MS the stellar mass, σR
the cross section for Rayleigh scattering, and assume the plan-
etary orbits to be circular. The remaining parameters needed to
compute refraction light curves are then given by (Hui & Seager
2002)

(cid:115)

D3
LS
GMS

,

P = 2π

g =

GMP
R2
0

,

σR = 10−27 cm2
µmH
√
2πR0H

ρ0 =

σR

λ

,

(cid:32)5000 Å

(cid:33)4

,

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

along with Eqs. (1)–(7). Equation (13) assumes that the eﬀec-
tive surface is set by Rayleigh scattering. This is a reasonable
assumption at a wavelength of 6500 Å in atmospheres devoid of
clouds and hazes, which is what is assumed here unless other-
wise stated. Importantly, the model is insensitive to the opacity

Fig. 1. Positions of the test planets presented in Table 2. The black line
is the limit between weak and strong lensing; the region above the line
is strongly lensing.

source. The model is constructed such that the optical depth
above R0 is zero and inﬁnite below. So, it is perfectly legitimate
to ignore the Rayleigh scattering modelled by Eq. (13) and to
set ρ0 and R0 manually. For example, if there are reasons to be-
lieve that a cloud deck obscures all paths below R0, then R0 can
be set to the radius that corresponds to the altitude at the top of
the cloud layer, in which case ρ0 would be the atmospheric mass
density at R0.

We provide the properties of all test planets in Table 2,
while their distribution in the BC-plane is shown in Fig. 1. Earth
and Jupiter are used as references for the other ﬁducial plan-
ets. The temperatures for Earth and Jupiter are chosen to be rep-
resentative of the majority of the atmosphere above the eﬀec-
tive Rayleigh surface. A temperature of 255 K is deemed repre-
sentative of the atmosphere of the Earth and the temperature of
150 K for Jupiter is based on the temperature proﬁle measured
by the Galileo atmospheric probe (Seiﬀ et al. 1998, Fig. 28). The
temperature of the 80-day super-Earth is assumed to scale as
T ∝ D−0.5
LS with respect to the Earth and the temperatures of the
20-day Jovian and 1-year Jovian with respect to Jupiter. The bulk
density for the ﬁducial super-Earth scenario is chosen based on
the empirical relation of Weiss & Marcy (2014, Eq. (3)), which
is ﬁtted to planets with radii in the range 1.5−4 R⊕. This relation
results in a mass of 3.9 M⊕ for a radius of 1.5 R⊕, corresponding
to a mean density of 6.4 g cm−3. It is also assumed that the mass
distributions within all planets are homogeneous. The average

A90, page 3 of 12

05001000150020002500300035004000C100101102103104105B20-dayJovian80-daysuper-EarthEarth1-yearJovianJupiterBest-caseJovianA&A 609, A90 (2018)

Fig. 2. Residuals for a light-curve model including refraction ﬁtted with
a plain transit model without refraction for Jupiter. The dash-dotted red
line is for a plain model with identical parameters as for the refraction
light curve. The dashed green line is for a plain model with ﬁxed, correct
limb-darkening coeﬃcients (LDCs). The solid blue line is a plain model
ﬁtted with 10% freedom in the LDCs. The vertical black lines mark
when the planet limb and centre cross the star limb. The reference time
is set to mid-transit.

density of the Jovian planets is assumed to be equal to that of
Jupiter.

The purpose of the best-case planet is to put a limit on the
maximum possible refraction strength. We ﬁx the orbital dis-
tance to the orbital distance of Jupiter because it sets the geo-
metrical deﬂection angle and is of little importance as long as the
angle is small (Sect. 3.2). The radius is set to the Jupiter radius
because an arbitrarily large signal strength can be achieved by
increasing the radius with an appropriate rescaling of the other
parameters. This leaves the atmospheric composition, which is
set to pure H2; planet mass, which is set to 1 MJ; and the tem-
perature, which is set to 600 K. It is shown in Sect. 3.2 that the
atmospheric composition, planet mass, and temperature are de-
generate. For example, a doubling in mass and temperature re-
sults in an identical light curve to that of the original parameters.
The purpose of the best-case planet is that any planet at an orbital
distance and with a radius equivalent to those of Jupiter yields a
weaker refraction signal. In this sense, the best-case planet sce-
nario can be considered as an upper limit. We note that the Earth
happens to show a stronger refraction signal for an Earth-sized
planet on a 1-year orbit and can serve as a best-case terrestrial
planet.

3. Model predictions
3.1. Refraction light curves

The primary question is what diﬀerences are caused by at-
mospheric refraction in transit light curves. This can be stud-
ied by generating a light curve using the refraction model of
Hui & Seager (2002) and then ﬁtting a model without refrac-
tion to it. Residuals (∆F) can then be computed by taking the
refraction light curve and subtracting the ﬁtted model from it.
Mathematically, ∆F = FR − FM, where FR is the normalised
predicted model ﬂux and FM is the normalised ﬂux of a ﬁt-
ted model. Figure 2 shows residuals for a refraction light curve

A90, page 4 of 12

Fig. 3. Refraction shoulders for the ﬁve strongly lensing test planets.
The y-axis is logarithmic for visual clarity. Blue is the reference Jupiter
and is identical to the blue line in Fig. 2. Red is the Earth, yellow is the
80-day super-Earth, green is the 80-day Jovian, and magenta is the best-
case Jovian planet. The reference time is set to when the planet centre
crosses the star limb, which is equivalent to the second vertical line in
Fig. 2.

ﬁtted with plain transit light-curve models without refraction for
Jupiter. The ﬁtted models are a plain transit light curve with the
parameters ﬁxed to those used for generating the refraction light
curve (dash-dotted red); with free inclination, orbital distance,
and planet radius but ﬁxed LDCs (dashed green); and with free
parameters and 10% freedom in the LDCs (solid blue). The ef-
fects of refraction are clearly seen as shoulders before and after
transit and a ﬂux decrease appears during transit. The shoulders
only exist for planets in the strong lensing regime. The near side
of a strongly lensing planet can occult the star before light starts
being lensed into view by the far side of the planet, in which case
the shoulders are suppressed. This is only relevant for systems
close to the limit between strong and weak lensing. Most sys-
tems in the strong lensing regime will exhibit shoulders. The ﬂux
decrease of ∼15 parts per million (ppm; dash-dotted red) at mid-
transit for Jupiter is relatively large. For comparison, the corre-
sponding ﬂux decrease for the 1-year Jovian case is (cid:46)1 ppm. One
of the main points of Fig. 2 is to show that many of the in-transit
refraction features are eliminated when ﬁtting a model with free
impact parameter, planet radius, and star-planet distance (dashed
green), especially when also allowing for some freedom in the
LDCs (solid blue).

3.2. Refraction shoulders

Refraction shoulders are expected to be the most easily de-
tectable features and depend on several atmospheric parameters.
Figure 3 shows refraction shoulders for the suite of test planets
provided in Table 2, except for the 20-day Jovian, which does
not exhibit shoulders as it is weakly lensing. The peak resid-
ual amplitudes and half-times for the planets are provided in
Table 3. A half-time is deﬁned as the time interval measured
from when the residual amplitude is half of the peak amplitude
to the time when the residual amplitude is at its peak. Systems
with higher peak amplitudes are not necessarily easier to detect.
For instance, when comparing the 80-day super-Earth with the
Earth, the super-Earth’s refraction shoulders have a higher peak

−1500−1000−500050010001500t(min)−15−10−505∆F(ppm)−200−150−100−500t(min)10−1100101∆F(ppm)D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

Fig. 4. Refraction signal strengths as functions of six diﬀerent refraction parameters. The left panel is the 80-day super-Earth and the right panel
is Jupiter. The x-axis is the ratio of the changing parameter to its original value. Red is wavelength, green is temperature, blue is planet mass, cyan
is radius, magenta is orbital distance, and yellow is molecular weight (which overlaps with planet mass). The signal is measured over 60 min for
the 80-day super-Earth and 600 min for Jupiter because of the diﬀerent characteristic timescales.

Table 3. Refraction shoulder properties.

Host

Planet

Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
Sun
M4V
M4V
M4V
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1
TRAPPIST-1

Earth
Super-Earth
Jupiter
1-year Jovian
Best-case
Earth
Super-Earth
Jupiter
b
c
d
e
f
g
h

(ppm)
0.3
0.4
4.1
3.6
17.3
2.9
2.6
18.3
2.0
3.3
7.4
19.6
23.8
18.7
40.2

Peak amp. Half-time

(min)
49
33
274
38
221
12
6
43
1
2
2
3
6
9
8

amplitude, but fade over shorter timescales than the shoulders of
the Earth.

We explore the parameter space by studying the strength
of refraction as a function of the following parameters: observ-
ing wavelength, temperature, mass, radius, orbital distance, and
molecular weight. This is done by scaling each parameter with
respect to the reference value that is provided in Table 2. The
molecular weight is scaled by simply assuming that the mass
of the atoms that constitute the atmosphere is changing. This
means that the refractive properties, which are unique for each
molecule, are assumed to be constant. Each parameter is as-
sumed to be independent of the other parameters that are used to
deﬁne a test planet, but propagates into the quantities that are cal-
culated using the scaled parameter, following the description in
Sect. 2.2. For example, the mass is assumed to be constant when
the radius is doubled, whereas a parameter such as the surface
gravity would be reduced by a factor of 4 following Eq. (11). We
thus deﬁne the refraction signal strength S∆t as the mean ∆F over

the ∆t minutes just before ﬁrst contact. This serves as a measure
of the shoulders’ detectability.

Refraction signal amplitudes for various ranges of param-
eters are shown in Fig. 4. The very steep refraction strength
drop-oﬀ at shorter wavelengths is primarily explained by the
fourth-order wavelength dependence of Rayleigh scattering (see
Eq. (12)). The radius R0 is set to the radius at which the optical
depth due to Rayleigh scattering is unity. A quickly increasing
scattering cross section at shorter wavelengths implies that the
eﬀective radius is shifted to higher altitudes where the density
is lower. A secondary eﬀect of decreasing wavelength is that the
refractive coeﬃcient increases, but this eﬀect is orders of mag-
nitude weaker than that of the increased Rayleigh cross section.
The wavelength dependence ﬂattens for long wavelengths be-
cause it only determines the capability of the atmosphere to de-
ﬂect light. This enters the model through the B parameter, which
is a deﬂection angle scaled by distance. Further increased de-
ﬂection strength beyond the point where the planet is capable of
deﬂecting light from its host star into the line of sight does not
result in a signiﬁcantly stronger signal because the limiting fac-
tor becomes the projected area of the atmosphere. This means
that B is eﬀectively saturated.

Figure 4 also shows that the refraction signal strength mono-
tonically increases with increasing orbital distance. The sig-
nal strength increases more steeply for shorter distances, then
reaches a break and keeps increasing more slowly. The steep re-
gion is where the refraction strength is limited by the capability
of the atmosphere to deﬂect the light at a large enough angle. The
break is the distance at which the B parameter eﬀectively satu-
rates, analogously to the break that is seen in the wavelength de-
pendence. The reason for a continued, slower refraction strength
increase for large distances is that the transit timescale lengthens
as a consequence of the Keplerian orbits of the planets.

The refraction signal strength has a non-monotonous depen-
dence on some of the parameters. The signal shows the same be-
haviour with respect to the molecular weight, mass, and inverse
temperature because these three parameters enter the equations
through B and C identically. The parameters decrease the scale
height and increases the density ρ0, both of which result in a
larger density gradient of the atmosphere, which increases the

A90, page 5 of 12

10−1100101Parametervaluerelativeto80-daysuper-Earth10−1100S60(ppm)10−1100101ParametervaluerelativetoJupiter10−1100101S600(ppm)A&A 609, A90 (2018)

Fig. 5. Same as Fig. 3, but with an M4V red dwarf host star. The 1-year
Jovian and best-case planet are excluded; they have no shoulders be-
cause they fall outside of the strong lensing regime.

atmosphere’s capability of deﬂecting light. A competing eﬀect
is that a decreased scale height also gives a smaller projected at-
mospheric area, which results in a lower refraction signal. The
balance between these two eﬀects yields a parameter value for
which the refraction strength is maximised. The density has a
stronger dependence on molecular weight than the planet mass
and inverse temperature, but this eﬀect is cancelled by a corre-
sponding decrease in the refractive coeﬃcient α.

The strongest dependence of refraction amplitude is on the
planet-to-star radius ratio. The refraction signal scales with
planet radius because of the increased projected atmospheric
area. Additional eﬀects are that the scale height increases and
atmospheric density decreases, which at a given radius renders
the atmosphere unable to deﬂect light at large enough angles to
be strongly lensing, resulting in a sharp cut-oﬀ. It is also possible
that the radius is large enough for the near side of the planet to
start occulting the star before the far side of the planet starts re-
fracting light into view. In this case, the strength of the refraction
signal also drops sharply.

3.3. Red dwarf host star
Refraction signal strength is dependent on host star proper-
ties, which is investigated by computing the refraction wings
for the same test suite of planets but with a red dwarf host.
The host star used is a ﬁducial M4V dwarf star with a ra-
dius of 0.26, mass of 0.2, and luminosity of 0.0055 relative to
the Sun (Reid & Hawley 2005; Kaltenegger & Traub 2009). The
LDCs are set to γ1 = 0.2 and γ2 = 0.4 corresponding to the
redder wavelengths of Berta-Thompson et al. (2015) because the
ﬂux of a red dwarf is assumed to be weighted towards longer
wavelengths in the Kepler bandpass. The test planets are moved
to an orbit at which they receive the same incident ﬂux as for a
Sun-like host. Only Earth, the 80-day super-Earth, and Jupiter
out of the ﬁve test planets are in the strongly lensing regime
with the M4V dwarf host. The refraction shoulders are shown
in Fig. 5. The two most striking diﬀerences are that the ampli-
tudes increase by a factor of ∼5 and the relevant timescales are
much shorter, which is clearly seen in Table 3.

We can then compare the detectability of refraction features
for Jupiter around the Sun and a Jupiter analogue around an M4V

A90, page 6 of 12

Fig. 6. Same as Fig. 3, but for the TRAPPIST-1 system at a wave-
length of 4.5 µm corresponding to the infrared Spitzer photometry of
Gillon et al. (2017). The planets are TRAPPIST-1b (red), c (green), d
(blue), e (cyan), f (magenta), g (yellow), and h (black).

dwarf star. Let ξ be the timescale, L host star luminosity, and as-
sume that the achievable photometric precision (σP) scales as
the square root of photon count. The precision is the relative un-
certainty from photon counting statistics that can be achieved
within a given time interval. For this reason a factor of P−1/2 is
introduced because it is assumed that observations are performed
whenever a transit occurs. In this case the precision follows
σP ∝

(cid:114)

(14)

·

ξL
P

The period around the dwarf star is six months compared to
twelve years around the Sun and the refraction timescale is
shorter by a factor of 274/43 ≈ 6.4 (from Table 3) around the
dwarf star. The ratio of precision around the Sun to precision
(cid:114)
around an M4V dwarf after twelve years of observations is then

(15)

×

274
43

× 0.5
12

≈ 7.

1

0.0055

The signal strength around the Sun is expected to be weaker by
roughly the same amount, see Table 3, so the predicted signal-
to-noise ratio (S/N) is similar for the Sun and for an M4V dwarf
host. Importantly, the M4V S/N would of course decrease if not
all transits are observed within the given time interval.

3.4. TRAPPIST-1
We now focus on the more extreme case of the M8V dwarf
TRAPPIST-1, which hosts seven Earth-size planets (Gillon et al.
2017). We compute the refraction shoulders for all TRAPPIST-1
planets at a wavelength of 4.5 µm, corresponding to the infrared
Spitzer photometry gathered for this object (Gillon et al. 2017).
The nominal eﬀect of limb darkening at 4.5 µm is ignored. It is
not reasonable to assume that Rayleigh scattering sets the eﬀec-
tive surface at a wavelength of 4.5 µm. Instead, the planet radius
(R0) is set to the radius at which the pressure is 1 atm, conse-
quently the mass density ρ0 is set to the density at R0, instead of
being computed using Eq. (13). We show the refraction shoul-
ders for all TRAPPIST-1 planets in Fig. 6 and their properties
in Table 3. We use the parameters (except for planet masses)
from Gillon et al. (2017), an assumed atmospheric composition

−200−150−100−500t(min)10−1100101∆F(ppm)−60−50−40−30−20−100t(min)100101∆F(ppm)D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

0.78N2 + 0.22O2, and planet masses from Wang et al. (2017).
The seventh planet, TRAPPIST-1h, shows the strongest refrac-
tion signal with a peak excess amplitude of 40 ppm and a half-
time of 11 min. It is not reasonable to expect any residual signal
to be stronger than 100 ppm for diﬀerent assumptions concern-
ing the atmospheric composition or when considering the uncer-
tainty of the parameters. This value was determined by exploring
the parameter space around TRAPPIST-1h.

The S/N for planets around TRAPPIST-1 and the Sun can
be compared using the precision deﬁned by Eq. (14). The lu-
minosity of TRAPPIST-1 is 0.000524 L(cid:12) and the orbital period
of TRAPPIST-1h is 18.8 days (Luger et al. 2017). The distance
with an equivalent incident ﬂux around the Sun would corre-
spond to a period of 1677 days. The peak amplitude of the re-
fraction shoulders of a TRAPPIST-1h analogue around the Sun
is 1 ppm with a half-time of 73 min. Analogously to Eq. (15),
the precision would be higher by a factor of

(cid:114)

×

73
8

1

0.000524

× 18.8
1677

≈ 14

(16)

around the Sun than TRAPPIST-1, which results in a comparable
S/N given that the refraction signal is 1 ppm around the Sun
compared to 40 ppm around TRAPPIST-1.

3.5. Weak lensing
Any in-transit, ingress, and egress signals are expected to be van-
ishing for weakly lensing planets because almost all of these re-
fraction eﬀects can be compensated for by ﬁtting a plain transit
model, especially when allowing for some freedom in the LDCs.
This can be seen for Jupiter in Fig. 2, where the residuals are
smaller than 1 ppm between the shoulders when ﬁtting a model
with 10% freedom in the LDCs. The 20-day Jovian is a planet
that is expected to have relatively strong lensing features even
though it is weakly lensing, primarily because it is large and
is further away from its host star than the closest close-in gi-
ants. Figure 7 shows the residuals for the 20-day Jovian planet
along with a set of planets with similar parameters. The main
point is that refraction features are not signiﬁcantly stronger and
present on much shorter timescales compared to strongly lensing
planets.

4. Observations
We then turn to observations where transit light curves from
Kepler are stacked and ﬁtted in an attempt to detect refraction
features. Kepler 30-min long-cadence simple aperture photome-
try (SAP) Jenkins et al. (2010, data release 25) are used for the
analysis. The products in the SAP data used for our purpose are
the timestamps, photometric ﬂuxes, 1-σ statistical ﬂux errors,
and quality ﬂags. Data for all Kepler objects of interest (KOIs)
from quarters 0 through 17 were downloaded from NASA Ex-
oplanet Archive1 (NEA) on 23 January 2017. The SAP data
have Argabrightening events mitigated (Witteborn et al. 2011)
and cosmic rays removed. Background estimates are then sub-
tracted and the photometric ﬂuxes are computed using optimal
apertures. The SAP is a less processed version than the pre-
search data conditioning SAP (PDCSAP) (Stumpe et al. 2012;
Smith et al. 2012), which has undergone additional artefact miti-
gation to account for instrument systematics. The choice of using
SAP instead of PDCSAP is made because the artefacts primar-
ily aﬀect longer timescales and additional high-level data re-
duction increases the risk of either removing refraction signals

1 http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu

Fig. 7. Residuals for a set of 20-day Jovians after ﬁtting a plain light-
curve model with 10% freedom in the limb-darkening coeﬃcients to
a refraction light curve. Blue is the reference planet with parameters
given in Table 2. Red is double temperature, green is double mass, cyan
is six times higher molecular weight, and yellow is double radius. The
vertical black lines mark when the planet centre crosses the star limb.
The reference time is set to mid-transit.

or introducing weak systematics that could be confused with
refraction-driven patterns in the data. Concerning false positives,
Fressin et al. (2013) determined that 90% of all KOIs are real
planets.

4.1. Light curve reduction and ﬁtting
The Kepler photometry data are reduced and ﬁtted in order to
study any systematic residuals. All transits for each KOI are
stacked and only data corresponding to ﬁve transit durations cen-
tred on the transit are kept for each transit. All data points during
transits of other KOIs in the same system or ﬂagged as bad in the
SAP are removed. Bad means that the ﬂag SAP_QUALITY is dif-
ferent from 0. This conservative rejection criterion is chosen be-
cause systematic residuals were observed otherwise. Each transit
is individually normalised by dividing the data with a quadratic
polynomial that is ﬁtted to the out-of-transit baselines, which
are deﬁned as the ﬁrst and last 1.5 transit durations out of the
ﬁve transit durations. This means that the actual transit and half
a transit duration before and after the transit are excluded. The
additional margin is introduced because of potential refraction
shoulders during the time intervals just before and after transit.
The transit light-curve model of Mandel & Agol (2002) is then
ﬁtted to the stack of all transits for each KOI. Transit timing
variations (TTVs) are modelled by introducing a sinusoidal shift
in time. Light curve ﬁtting is performed using the Levenberg-
Marquardt gradient descent function curve_fit in SciPy 0.13.3
with eight free parameters; star-planet distance, planet radius, in-
clination, two LDCs and three TTV parameters. The LDCs are
given 10% freedom with respect to the values in NEA, which are
derived using the method of Claret & Bloemen (2011) using the
ATLAS model and least-squares method with eﬀective temper-
atures and surface gravities from Huber et al. (2014). The three
TTV parameters are the amplitude, frequency, and initial phase
of the sinusoidal shift in time. A 5-σ clip is then applied to the
data meaning that points with a photometric residual of more
than ﬁve sigma are removed. A second normalisation using the

A90, page 7 of 12

−150−100−50050100150t(min)−10−5051015∆F(ppm)A&A 609, A90 (2018)

same conservative baseline is then performed with the additional
requirement that the normalisation function is ﬁtted to at least
ﬁve points on each side. A minimum of 14 data points between
the baseline intervals are demanded to ensure that the reference
level is well determined and that the transit contains a mean-
ingful amount of information. Transits with too few points are
removed and the remaining stacked transits are reﬁtted.

The accuracy of the photometric baseline for each transit is
checked using two tests (Sheets & Deming 2014). Firstly, a line
is ﬁtted to the ﬁrst interval and projected to the other side of
transit. The transit is rejected if the mean of the projection at the
time of the other baseline deviates by more than 0.001 (relative
ﬂux) from 0. It was veriﬁed that the choice of 0.001 resulted
in a reasonable balance between number of rejected transits and
light-curve quality. The projection is then reversed by ﬁtting to
the second interval and projecting to the ﬁrst. It is possible that
a transit light curve passes one but not both parts of the test.
Secondly, it is required that the two lines from the projection
test have slopes that are consistent with 0 at 3-σ. Only transits
with both slopes being consistent with 3-σ are kept for further
analysis. Light curve ﬁts are then performed for each KOI to the
stack of the transits that passed both tests. Finally, the deviations
of the residuals are tested for systematics using the red-noise
test presented in Sheets & Deming (2014). If the noise is solely
composed of statistical ﬂuctuations, such as for photon count-
ing, then log(σ) ∝ −0.5 log(N), where σ is the sample standard
deviation and N is the size of the bins. The stacked residuals for
all transits of a given KOI are binned with diﬀerent bin sizes,
allowing for ﬁtting of log(σ) against log(N). Only KOIs with
ﬁtted noise slopes in the range −0.8 to −0.3 are kept. This is
an eﬃcient way to ﬁlter KOIs with various systematic errors on
diﬀerent timescales.

A total of 2394 out of the 4707 KOI light curves pass all
tests. The median reduced χ2 value for the 2394 ﬁts is 1.24 and
the arithmetic mean is 1.47. The distribution of the number of
degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) for the 2394 planets has a median
of 8680 and arithmetic mean of 13 733. The primary condition
that candidates failed was the requirement of 14 data points be-
tween the intervals used for baseline ﬁtting. This is essentially
equivalent to requiring transits to be longer than three hours,
which excludes 1743 KOIs. These are close-in planets and are
not expected to show any refraction signal because of the geom-
etry of the planetary system and the refraction timescale com-
pared to the 30-min cadence of Kepler. This scenario is studied
in Sect. 3.5; examples are shown in Fig. 7.

4.2. Selection of candidates

A subset of 305 out of the 2394 ﬁtted KOIs are selected based on
the following criteria. It is required that the planet radius is larger
than 0.025 stellar radii and orbital period longer than 40 days.
This is based on theoretical expectations of which planet popu-
lation would show the strongest refraction signals. The choice
of having an orbital-period requirement instead of star-planet
distance cut-oﬀ is because the period is more robust as it is
measured directly in contrast to the star-planet distance, which
is determined by the multi-dimensional light-curve ﬁt. It is re-
quired that ﬁtted planet radii should be smaller than 0.5 of the
host star radius and that impact parameters be smaller than 1.
These criteria mainly reject poorly ﬁtted KOIs. The subset of
305 large planets with long orbits will henceforth serve as the
primary sample in the analysis. The median reduced χ2 value for
the 305 selected planets is 1.22 and the arithmetic mean is 1.46.

A90, page 8 of 12

Fig. 8. Binned residuals for the sample of 305 large planets on long
orbits. The blue line is the theoretical prediction for a Jovian planet on
a 1-year orbit. The precision of the stacked residuals is clearly not high
enough to detect any refraction signal. Negative distances are before
mid-transit and positive distances are after. The vertical black lines mark
when the planet centre crosses the star limb.

The distribution of the d.o.f. for the 305 planets has a median of
3358 and arithmetic mean of 3941.

5. Stacked Kepler data

Figure 8 shows the stacked residuals for the selected sample
of 305 large planets with long orbits. A total of 101 557 long-
cadence data points are stacked, with an average of 3174 points
per bin. The bins are 0.125 wide in units of host star radii. The
relatively long timescale is chosen to reveal refraction shoulders.
The residual signal is expected to be of the order of 1 ppm. The
precision of the stacked residuals is in the range 2.3–8.4 ppm,
implying that any refraction shoulders are not expected to be de-
tectable. The increased noise towards mid-transit occurs primar-
ily because many projected KOI transits do not cross the central
parts of the host star, resulting in fewer data points. The blue line
is the theoretical prediction for a Jovian planet on a 1-year orbit.
It is not a best-case scenario, but a signal in the averaged resid-
uals can most likely not be expected to be stronger than that of
a 1-year Jovian. This is determined by exploring the parameter
space and studying the residuals for many planets in the sample.
Figure 9 shows the stacked residuals around ingress and
egress for the sample of 305 large planets with long orbits. The
sample is the same as in Fig. 8, but contrary to Fig. 8, the data in
Fig. 9 have the x-axis in units of planet radii. Additionally, the
distance on the x-axis is the distance from the stellar limb to the
planet centre. A total of 28 911 data points are stacked, with an
average of 903 per bin. The choice of unit is made because re-
fraction features around ingress and egress are expected to scale
with planet size. This is in contrast with the refraction shoulders
that scale with the planet-centre to star-centre distance. Further-
more, each bin is half a planet radius wide allowing for resolu-
tion of features on shorter timescales. The purpose of this ﬁgure
is to reveal any potential features that are similar to those shown
in Fig. 7. This would be the only refraction signal for planets that
are not strongly lensing. The signal is expected to be a few tenths
of ppm at Kepler long cadence and the precision of the stacked

−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0Planet-centretostar-centredistance(starradius)−20−15−10−5051015∆F(ppm)D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

both with and without TTV modelling are skewed towards large
values and have medians of 1.237 and 1.239, respectively. A
TTV model with more freedom which allowed each transit to
shift slightly in time and another model allowing each transit
to shift with respect to the previous one were tested. Both were
discarded because they introduced artefacts around ingress and
egress. It is clear from Fig. 10 that no systematic residuals are
observed out of transit. Any feature at a few ppm, such as signs
of rings or moons, would be obvious.

No signiﬁcant diﬀerences to the presented results are ob-
served when dividing the KOIs into other subsets. This includes
separating the sample into narrow ranges of star-planet distances
and planet sizes. Eﬀects of other ﬁtting parameters and selection
criteria are also studied.

Fig. 9. Binned residuals for the sample of large planets on long orbits.
Contrary to Fig. 8, the x-axis is the distance from the stellar limb to the
planet centre in units of planet radii. The blue line is the theoretical pre-
diction for a Jovian planet on a 20-day orbit. It is equivalent to the blue
line in Fig. 4 as observed through the 30-min long cadence of Kepler.
Negative distances are when planets are inside of the stellar disc and
positive distances are outside. The vertical black lines mark when the
planet limb and centre cross the star limb.

Fig. 10. Same as Fig. 8, but for all 2394 KOIs that were ﬁtted. The
blue line was computed for a 1-year Jovian and is not representative for
the stacked planets. It is not the expected signal for the sample and is
included for reference only.

residuals is approximately 7 ppm. Thus, any refraction features
are not expected to be detectable in this case.

A blind search for any systematic residuals at a high pre-
cision in the sample of all 2394 ﬁtted KOIs is made by stack-
ing the residuals at a bin size of 0.125 star radii, shown in
Fig. 10. The stack contains a total of 2.7 million long-cadence
data points with an average of 84 thousand per bin. The preci-
sion during the transit ranges from 0.3–1 ppm. The residual ex-
cess centred on mid-transit possibly stems from inaccurate TTV
ﬁtting. The three-parameter TTV model (Sect. 4.1) lowered the
reduced χ2 value from 1.481 for 5.34 × 106 d.o.f. to 1.469 for
5.46 × 106 d.o.f. (more d.o.f. with the TTV model because more
transits passed all tests). The distributions of reduced χ2 values

6. Discussion
6.1. Connection with physical properties
The refraction strength is very sensitive to the atmospheric scale
height, composition, and density, potentially allowing for con-
straints on the atmosphere using solely photometric data. How-
ever, parameters such as the planet radius and orbital distance are
more strongly constrained by other observational methods than
atmospheric lensing.

Refraction also allows for constraints on the presence of
clouds or hazes in the atmosphere. No refraction can be observed
in atmospheric layers that are opaque due to clouds, hazes, or
other obscuring weather conditions, implying that any refrac-
tion features can be taken as an indication of relatively clear
skies. Searching for refraction residuals using photometry alone
can therefore yield suitable targets for follow-up observations,
as previously pointed out by Misra & Meadows (2014). An al-
ternative approach to detect refraction is to measure molecular
feature wing steepness and relative depths of absorption features
in near-infrared transmission spectra (Benneke & Seager 2013).
Refraction shoulders, which are only possible in the strong
lensing regime, are likely to be easier to observe than any
ingress, egress, or in-transit residuals. Refraction will be very
challenging to detect for weakly lensing systems because the
timescales are much shorter. We note that the refraction resid-
uals are usually compensated for when adjusting a transit model
to the data. These residuals can also be confused with stellar os-
cillations, starspots, and other minor eﬀects such as rings and
moons (Hippke 2015; Kipping et al. 2015; Heller 2017). An ad-
ditional source of error is the accuracy of the stellar surface
brightness proﬁle. The nature of the refraction shoulders, be-
ing out of transit, facilitates the interpretation of the refraction
signal.

There is no simple relation between most physical param-
eters and refraction strength. It is a trade-oﬀ that depends on
many parameters, as is shown in Sect. 3.2. The only predictor
for refraction that is robust is if the system is strongly lens-
ing, but this does not immediately translate to signal strength.
The exact position in the BC-plane is not simply correlated with
refraction signal strength, although it does give some informa-
tion on qualitative features (e.g. the overall shape of the re-
fraction residuals), but contains little quantitative information.
It is worth emphasising that refraction can set the eﬀective ra-
dius only if the planet is strongly lensing, which is impor-
tant for transmission spectroscopy and is further discussed in
Sect. 6.2. The largest refraction peak amplitudes for realistic
planets orbiting Sun-like stars are on the order of 10 ppm, see
Sect. 3 and Misra & Meadows (2014), but amplitudes as large

A90, page 9 of 12

Planet-centretostar-limbdistance(planetradius)31-1-3−30−20−100102030∆F(ppm)Ingress-3-113−30−20−100102030Egress−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0Planet-centretostar-centredistance(starradius)−2−101234567∆F(ppm)A&A 609, A90 (2018)

as 100 ppm have been reported for hypothetical ﬁducial plan-
ets (Hui & Seager 2002; Sidis & Sari 2010). The Earth and the
best-case Jovian can be used as examples of planets with high re-
fraction signal strength given their respective orbital distance and
radius. The exact signal strength is sensitive to a set of parame-
ters and only seems to be strong for certain combinations, which
means that refraction will be an important eﬀect for a small num-
ber of planets that happen to be favourable for lensing.

very weak close to strong absorption features or towards shorter
wavelengths where Rayleigh scattering becomes important. In
this case, any eﬀects of refraction will be restricted to the low-
opacity regimes. The general guideline is that refraction does not
obscure layers of the atmosphere if the planet is weakly lensing.
Weak lensing could be restricted to certain wavelengths if the
opacity is wavelength dependent or it could be restricted to some
transits because of transient clouds or hazes.

6.2. Effects on transmission spectroscopy
Refraction has attracted much attention as it could increase
the eﬀective radius of a planet and set a “surface” above
the deepest layers of the atmosphere, which has critical con-
sequences for transmission spectroscopy (García Muñoz et al.
2012; Bétrémieux & Kaltenegger 2013, 2014; Bétrémieux 2016;
Bétrémieux & Swain 2017). This eﬀect is more pronounced
for in-transit transmission spectra and it was emphasised by
Misra et al. (2014) that deeper layers can be probed out of tran-
sit in such cases. There is a deep connection between refraction
shoulders, which are observed out of transit, and the maximum
depth reached by in-transit transmission spectroscopy. The rea-
son the deepest layers are obscured in cases where refraction
sets an eﬀective surface is that any light passing through the
deep layers are deﬂected at a large enough angle such that no
light from these regions reaches the observer while the planet is
in transit. This also means that the light that penetrates deeply
into the atmosphere can be observed near transit because of the
large deﬂection angles, which was ﬁrst pointed out by Sidis &
Sari (2010; their Figs. 2 and 3) and then also by Misra et al.
(2014; their Fig. 9). The photon paths that pass the deep lay-
ers and consequently are deﬂected at large angles also constitute
the refraction shoulders. Combining the above arguments means
that weakly lensing planets cannot have an eﬀective surface set
by refraction because they are not capable of deﬂecting light at
large enough angles. The scenario is more complicated if the
planet is strongly lensing because some parts of the atmosphere
become inaccessible during parts of or throughout the transit. It
is therefore not necessary for atmospheric layers to be obscured
throughout the entire transit, but that the eﬀective exposure time
is altitude dependent. Obscured deep layers can be recovered to
some extent by observing the out-of-transit spectra in the refrac-
tion shoulders. The signal is weaker out of transit because of the
geometry that eﬀectively only exposes a narrow slit of the atmo-
sphere on the outer side of the planet to starlight. This means that
refraction can have signiﬁcant eﬀects on transmission spectra
for strongly lensing planets even if refraction shoulders cannot
be detected because of insuﬃcient photometric precision. In the
most extreme cases, the deepest layers may not even be observ-
able out of transit because photons beyond a certain depth are
eﬀectively trapped by the atmosphere. This possibility is clearly
conceptualised by Sidis & Sari (2010) who discuss the trapping
of photons in transparent planets and the idea of a “lower bound-
ary” deﬁned by Bétrémieux & Kaltenegger (2015).

Refraction is only weakly dependent on wavelength and is
unlikely to introduce any artefacts that can be interpreted as
spectral features in transmission spectra. The wavelength depen-
dence of refraction is incorporated in the model through R0 and
the refractive coeﬃcient α (Appendix A). Only the latter is in-
herent to refraction, whereas the former is a radius set by ab-
sorption due to other processes. The inherent wavelength depen-
dence of refraction can be neglected for practically all realistic
cases. However, it is possible that refraction becomes signiﬁ-
cant at wavelengths where the atmosphere is optically thin but

A90, page 10 of 12

6.3. Host star
Refraction features depend on host star parameters. Smaller stars
result in larger relative amplitudes for all features because all
normalised quantities scale with the ratio of projected planet area
to star area. An extreme case of a peak amplitude of 950 ppm
was reported by Misra & Meadows (2014) for a 200 K Saturn
analogue around an M9V dwarf. The downside is that the lu-
minosity for small dwarf stars is much lower and orbits with
the same incident ﬂux as for Sun-like stars are closer-in, which
means that the transit duration is shorter but repeats more of-
ten. The change in S/N of any refraction signal is much less
than the peak amplitude might suggest when all parameters are
taken into account, as shown in Sect. 3.3. Misra et al. (2014) and
Bétrémieux & Kaltenegger (2014) reported that deeper layers of
planet atmospheres can be probed for analogous planets around
cooler stars. This means that transmission spectra can contain
information from diﬀerent parts of the atmosphere although the
S/N of photometric residuals is expected to be approximately
the same for diﬀerent host stars (Sect. 3.3). It was also shown
that only three out of the ﬁve strongly lensing planets around
Sun-like hosts are strongly lensing if orbiting an M4V dwarf.
Going from strongly to weakly lensing shows that deeper layers
of atmospheres can be probed around dwarf stars than around
Sun-like stars because weakly lensing planets are guaranteed to
have their entire atmospheres exposed throughout transits, im-
plying that layers that are inaccessible around a Sun-like star are
exposed around red dwarfs.

6.4. Alternative refraction scenarios
It is possible for the atmosphere of an exoplanet to lens a back-
ground star, analogously to gravitational microlensing. The re-
fraction model predicts inﬁnite ampliﬁcation for background
lensing, which clearly is an artefact of an idealisation. A more
realistic guess would be an ampliﬁcation of a factor of a few,
based on observed gravitational microlensing light curves. The
main diﬃculty becomes the occurrence rate. The cross section is
a few AU for gravitational lensing compared to a planet diam-
eter for atmospheric lensing. The brightness increase does not
have to be mixed with the host star light if the lensing planet
can be directly imaged, since the lensed images of the back-
ground star will be in the atmosphere of the exoplanet. Impor-
tantly, any lensed light would have been transmitted through the
atmosphere, thereby having its spectral imprint.

Another consequence of atmospheric lensing is that it is pos-
sible for planets with a near-transiting geometry to increase the
ﬂux without ever occulting the host star. This is just the eﬀect of
having a system that would have refraction shoulders if it was
transiting, but instead showing a single ﬂux excess peak when it
passes the star without entering the stellar disc.

6.5. Kepler observations
No refraction signal is observed in the Kepler data when tran-
sits are stacked. The achieved precision is not high enough to

D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres

residual excess amplitude on atmospheric parameters and shows
comparable results.

Acknowledgements. We thank the anonymous referee for the helpful comments
that improved the manuscript. B.-O.D. acknowledges support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation in the form of a SNSF Professorship (PP00P2-
163967). This paper includes data collected by the Kepler mission. Funding for
the Kepler mission is provided by the NASA Science Mission directorate. This
research has made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the
California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program. This re-
search made use of Astropy, a community-developed core Python package for
Astronomy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013). This research has made use of
NASA’s Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services.

A33

103

constrain refraction in the sample of large planets in long orbits,
which is the population where refraction is expected to be sig-
niﬁcant. It is still possible that refraction is relatively strong for
a few targets, but these get suppressed when stacked with the
rest of the sample. No attempt was made to constrain refraction
in individual sources because computing refraction light curves
is computationally intensive and the observational precision is
clearly lower than predicted refraction shoulder amplitudes.

A lack of refraction signatures in the stack of all ﬁtted plan-
ets is expected because the transit method is generally biased
towards detecting planets on short orbital periods. The short
planet-to-star distance is disadvantageous for refraction because
it requires atmospheres to deﬂect light at larger angles. The only
systematic residuals that can be seen in the stack of all planets is
the central excess with a peak amplitude of 5 ppm.

7. Conclusions
We have studied the eﬀects of atmospheric refraction on transit
light curves and searched for refraction signatures in data from
the Kepler mission. Our main conclusions are the following:

1. Refraction residuals in photometric data can constrain phys-
ical properties of exoplanet atmospheres, such as density,
scale height, and to some extent composition.

2. Out-of-transit refraction shoulders are the most robust and
detectable residuals induced by atmospheric lensing and
can reach peak residual excess amplitudes of approximately
10 ppm. More probable amplitudes are a few ppm or less
for Jovians and sub-ppm for super-Earths. In-transit, ingress,
and egress features are probably very challenging to de-
tect because of short timescales and degeneracy with other
transit-model parameters.

3. The parameter space is highly complex and depends criti-
cally on a number of the parameters parametrising a plane-
tary system. Refraction will prove important for some targets
whereas most planets will show very weak refraction signals.
4. Eﬀects of refraction on transmission spectroscopy are deeply
connected with refraction shoulders. Refraction does not set
the eﬀective radius if the planet is weakly lensing. The im-
pact of refraction on transmission spectra for strongly lens-
ing planets can vary greatly.

5. The detectability of refraction signals for planets orbiting red
dwarfs cannot be assessed by the sole increase in peak resid-
ual amplitude. A combination of shorter timescale, shorter
orbits, shorter star-planet distance, and host star properties
results in similar values of S/N for planets orbiting Sun-like
hosts. However, the altitudes probed can be diﬀerent even
though the S/N is approximately the same.

6. Refraction residuals cannot be observed in stacked Kepler
light curves because of insuﬃcient photometric precision.
The only systematic deviation across the entire Kepler sam-
ple is a central excess of a few ppm.

While the present paper was in review, we learnt of a similar
study by Dalba (2017). It also explores the dependence of peak

References
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,

Benneke, B., & Seager, S. 2013, ApJ, 778, 153
Berta-Thompson, Z. K., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2015, Nature, 527, 204
Bétrémieux, Y. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 4051
Bétrémieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2013, ApJ, 772, L31
Bétrémieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2014, ApJ, 791, 7
Bétrémieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 1268
Bétrémieux, Y., & Swain, M. R. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2834
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1999, Principles of optics: electromagnetic theory of

propagation, interference and diﬀraction of light (Cambridge University
Press)

Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., Megeath, S. T., et al. 2005, ApJ, 626, 523
Claret, A., & Bloemen, S. 2011, A&A, 529, A75
Dalba, P. A. 2017, ApJ, 848, 91
Demory, B.-O. 2014, ApJ, 789, L20
Demory, B.-O., Gillon, M., Seager, S., et al. 2012, ApJ, 751, L28
Fressin, F., Torres, G., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766, 81
García Muñoz, A., Zapatero Osorio, M. R., Barrena, R., et al. 2012, ApJ, 755,

Gillon, M., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Demory, B.-O., et al. 2017, Nature, 542, 456
Griﬃths, D. 1999, Introduction to Electrodynamics (Prentice Hall)
Heller, R. 2017, ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1701.04706]
Hippke, M. 2015, ApJ, 806, 51
Hubbard, W. B., Fortney, J. J., Lunine, J. I., et al. 2001, ApJ, 560, 413
Huber, D., Silva Aguirre, V., Matthews, J. M., et al. 2014, ApJS, 211, 2
Hui, L., & Seager, S. 2002, ApJ, 572, 540
Jenkins, J. M., Caldwell, D. A., Chandrasekaran, H., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, L120
Kaltenegger, L., & Traub, W. A. 2009, ApJ, 698, 519
Kipping, D. M., Schmitt, A. R., Huang, X., et al. 2015, ApJ, 813, 14
Koch, D. G., Borucki, W. J., Basri, G., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, L79
Luger, R., Sestovic, M., Kruse, E., et al. 2017, Nature Astron., 1, 0129
Mandel, K., & Agol, E. 2002, ApJ, 580, L171
Misra, A. K., & Meadows, V. S. 2014, ApJ, 795, L14
Misra, A., Meadows, V., & Crisp, D. 2014, ApJ, 792, 61
Reid, I. N., & Hawley, S. L. 2005, New light on dark stars: red dwarfs, low-mass

stars, brown dwarfs (Praxis Publishing Ltd.)

Seager, S., & Sasselov, D. D. 2000, ApJ, 537, 916
Seiﬀ, A., Kirk, D. B., Knight, T. C. D., et al. 1998, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 22857
Sheets, H. A., & Deming, D. 2014, ApJ, 794, 133
Sidis, O., & Sari, R. 2010, ApJ, 720, 904
Smith, J. C., Stumpe, M. C., Van Cleve, J. E., et al. 2012, PASP, 124, 1000
Stumpe, M. C., Smith, J. C., Van Cleve, J. E., et al. 2012, PASP, 124, 985
Sudarsky, D., Burrows, A., & Pinto, P. 2000, ApJ, 538, 885
Wang, S., Wu, D.-H., Barclay, T., & Laughlin, G. P. 2017, ApJ, submitted

[arXiv:1704.04290]

Weiss, L. M., & Marcy, G. W. 2014, ApJ, 783, L6
Witteborn, F. C., Van Cleve, J., Borucki, W., Argabright, V., & Hascall, P. 2011,
in Techniques and Instrumentation for Detection of Exoplanets V, Proc. SPIE,
8151, 815117

A90, page 11 of 12

A&A 609, A90 (2018)

Appendix A: Cauchy’s equation
Cauchy’s equation is used to compute the refractive coeﬃcient
(α) for diﬀerent atmospheric compositions. The refractive coef-
ﬁcient is not to be confused with the refractive index (n), which
are related by n = 1 + αρ, where ρ is the density. The refractive
coeﬃcient is given by αρ = A1(1 + B1/λ2), where A1 is the co-
eﬃcient of refraction, B1 is the coeﬃcient of dispersion, and λ
is the wavelength. Coeﬃcients for some common gases are pro-
vided in Table A.1. The refractive coeﬃcients are calculated at a
temperature of 0 ◦C and pressure of 1 atm, and are assumed to
be constant over the relevant temperatures and pressures.

Table A.1. Cauchy’s equation coeﬃcients.
A1 × 10−5

Gas composition

Hydrogen
Helium
Argon
Nitrogen
Oxygen
Methane
Ethane
Air

13.60
3.48
27.92
29.19
26.63
42.60
73.65
28.79

B1 × 105
(Å2)
7.7
2.3
5.6
7.7
5.1
14.4
9.1
5.7

Notes. Values are given for gases at a temperature of 0 ◦C and pressure
of 1 atm (Born & Wolf 1999; Griﬃths 1999).

A90, page 12 of 12


