DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731484 Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres Photometric signatures, implications for transmission spectroscopy, and search 1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 2 Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland e-mail: brice.demory@csh.unibe.ch Received 30 June 2017 / Accepted 27 October 2017 Context. Refraction deflects photons that pass through atmospheres, which aects transit light curves. Refraction thus provides an avenue to probe physical properties of exoplanet atmospheres and to constrain the presence of clouds and hazes. In addition, an eective surface can be imposed by refraction, thereby limiting the pressure levels probed by transmission spectroscopy. Aims. The main objective of the paper is to model the eects of refraction on photometric light curves for realistic planets and to explore the dependencies on atmospheric physical parameters. We also explore under which circumstances transmission spectra are signicantly aected by refraction. Finally, we search for refraction signatures in photometric residuals in Kepler data. Methods. We use the model of Hui & Seager (2002, ApJ, 572, 540) to compute deflection angles and refraction transit light curves, allowing us to explore the parameter space of atmospheric properties. The observational search is performed by stacking large samples of transit light curves from Kepler. Results. We nd that out-of-transit refraction shoulders are the most easily observable features, which can reach peak amplitudes of 10 parts per million (ppm) for planets around Sun-like stars. More typical amplitudes are a few ppm or less for Jovians and at the sub-ppm level for super-Earths. In-transit, ingress, and egress refraction features are challenging to detect because of the short timescales and degeneracies with other transit model parameters. Interestingly, the signal-to-noise ratio of any refraction residuals for planets orbiting Sun-like hosts are expected to be similar for planets orbiting red dwarfs and ultra-cool stars. We also nd that the maximum depth probed by transmission spectroscopy is not limited by refraction for weakly lensing planets, but that the incidence of refraction can vary signicantly for strongly lensing planets. We nd no signs of refraction features in the stacked Kepler light curves, which is in agreement with our model predictions. Key words. planets and satellites: atmospheres The transit method is one of the most successful at nding exoplanets, with thousands of detections by the Kepler mis sion (Koch et al. 2010) alone. Transit ically modelled as planets occulting host stars with non uniform brightness proles (Mandel & Agol 2002). Light curves with higher photometric precision reveal additional eects, such as thermal emission from planets (e.g. Charbonneau et al. 2005; Demory et al. 2012) and reflected host star light (e.g. Sudarsky et al. 2000; Demory 2014). Searches for rings and moons have also been carried out (Hippke 2015; Kipping et al. 2015; Heller 2017). Further development of light-curve models is therefore desirable in order to account for physical eects that were previously not included, especially on the verge of the com missioning of new facilities that will signicantly improve the current photometric capabilities. Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres, or atmospheric lens ing, was rst discussed by Seager & Sasselov (2000) and Hubbard et al. (2001), who concluded that refraction is weak at low pressures. Hui & Seager (2002) presented a model and made the rst detailed study of the eects of refraction and oblateness on transit light curves. Sidis & Sari (2010) studied refraction in the extreme case of a transparent planet and showed that dips in light curves can be caused by refractive transpar ent planets. Btrmieux & Kaltenegger (2015) provide analytic expressions for the column density and deflection angle, and make comparisons with a ray-tracing algorithm. Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres have received increased attention over the past few years and several authors have emphasised that re fraction can set the eective planet radius (Garca Muoz et al. 2012; Btrmieux & Kaltenegger 2013, 2014). The implications of the eective surface depth due to refraction on transmis sion spectroscopy have also been studied (Btrmieux 2016; Btrmieux & Swain 2017). Several authors have studied how transmission spectra depend on transit phase and the possibil ity of using refraction to probe the atmospheric composition at dierent altitudes (Sidis & Sari 2010; Garca Muoz et al. 2012; Misra et al. 2014). Refraction signatures in photometric light curves have been proposed by Misra & Meadows (2014) to serve as an ecient method of identifying clear skies. No attempt has yet been made to detect refraction signals in observational data despite the recent theoretical developments. This paper studies the eects of refraction on transit light curves and how refraction signals depend on physical proper ties of exoplanet atmospheres. We compute the expected signal Article published by EDP Sciences strengths and characteristics for a sample of planets. We then dis cuss the eects of refraction on planetary transmission spectra. We nally survey the complete Kepler primary mission dataset to search for refraction features. The paper is organised as follows. We describe the model and suite of test planets in Sect. 2, and present model predictions in Sect. 3. Observations and data reduction are detailed in Sect. 4, and observational results are presented in Sect. 5. We discuss our ndings in Sect. 6, and summarise our conclusions in Sect. 7. We use the following conventions and denitions: residuals are dened as F = FR  FM, where FR is the normalised ob served or predicted model flux and FM is the normalised flux of a tted model. All uncertainties are one standard deviation. We parametrise the stellar surface brightness as I = 1 1 (1 )  2 (1 )2, where 1 and 2 are the limb-darkening coecients 1  r2 with r as radial distance from the stel lar disc centre. The following parameter values are used unless otherwise stated: an impact parameter of 0.5 stellar radii, a pho ton wavelength of 6500 , stellar radius equal to the solar value, 1 = 0.37, and 2 = 0.27. The LDCs correspond to the solar val ues computed using the theoretical tables of Claret & Bloemen (2011) in the Kepler bandpass. Table 1. List of symbols (Hui & Seager 2002). observerlens (observerplanet) distance lenssource (planetstar) distance atmospheric mass density at R0 source position in the sky plane image position in the sky plane star-centre position in the sky plane We present in the following an outline of the atmospheric refrac tion transit light-curve model of Hui & Seager (2002), to which the reader is referred for a rigorous derivation and comprehen sive description of the model. The model assumes isothermal atmosphere in hydrostatic equilibrium and uniform vertical at mospheric composition. We note that a factor of two is missing in Eq. (9) of Hui & Seager (2002), see our Eq. (4). We emphasise that it is the absolute magnitude of the magnication (A) that en ters Eq. (1). Negative magnications signies that the image has been spatially reversed, but only the photometric amplitude is of interest for refraction light curves. Hui & Seager (2002) also treat the eects caused by oblateness of planets, but in this work planets are assumed to be spherical. In this paper we use the no tation shown in Table 1, which is the same as the notation used by Hui & Seager (2002). Let I(S  (t)) be the surface bright ness of the star as a function of source position and star-centre position and W(I) be the occultation kernel of the planet disc, which is 0 when the observed image position is within the planet radius and 1 otherwise. Hui & Seager (2002) veried that the step model was a good approximation to reality. Then, the equa tions describing atmospheric refraction become where the approximation DOL (cid:29) DLS in Eq. (7) holds for exo planet transits. The transit light curve is given by Eq. (1) and is an integral over the stellar disc, which is treated as a flat surface. The quantities denoted by  and u2  can be thought of as lensing potentials. The parameter B is essentially just a deflection angle that has been scaled by a ratio of distances and C is the ratio of binding energy to thermal energy. Much of the physics is captured by the important parameters B and C. Of particular importance is the dividing line between where the system is strongly lensing if the condition is ful lled (Hui & Seager 2002). Strong lensing occurs when caustics are present. Caustics are source positions for which the mag nication diverges (Hui & Seager 2002). A more intuitive and equivalent condition for strong lensing is when photons can be refracted into view by the far side of the planet. The far side is where the image is closer to the planet centre than its source position. A consequence of strong lensing is that the flux can in crease above the baseline before and after transit. The baseline refers to the out-of-transit flux. The increase of flux just outside of transit will henceforth be referred to as refraction shoulders. Importantly, the information contained in the B and C parame ters does not capture all the properties that could be connected to the photometric signal strength. Importantly, refraction can ob scure atmospheric layers only if the planet is strongly lensing, which is crucial for transmission spectroscopy (see Sect. 6.2).  Table 2. Physical, atmospheric, and orbital parameters for the test planets. D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres Radius Temp. Atm. composition Notes. Atmospheric composition fractions are given by number. The 0.86H2 + 0.14He mixture for the Jovian planets is equivalent to 76% H2 and 24% He by mass, which is the atmospheric composition of Jupiter. Other models for refraction have been published based on a ray-tracing approach (Garca Muoz et al. 2012; Btrmieux & Kaltenegger 2013, 2015; Misra et al. 2014), which implies that the equivalent to the analytic expression for the magni cation in Eq. (2) needs to be determined numerically. This ap proach is computationally more demanding than the model of Hui & Seager (2002), which only requires Eq. (1) to be com puted numerically. This is because the assumption of an atmo sphere that is isothermal in hydrostatic equilibrium and with uniform vertical composition allows the use of an analytic ex pression in Eq. (2). We note that Misra & Meadows (2014) re ported that the assumption of an isothermal atmosphere results in no signicant dierence after testing realistic tropospheric lapse rates and stratospheric temperature inversions using their ray tracing framework. Alternately, Sidis & Sari (2010) developed a model that provides analytic approximations for the observed flux near and away from occultation, but at the cost of ignoring We construct a suite of test planets for the analysis of refraction transit light curves. Each planet is dened by a set of parameters, T, MP, R0, DLS, and atmospheric composition, where MP is the planet mass and the remaining variables are dened following Hui & Seager (2002, Table 1). The atmospheric composition is related to  by Cauchys equation (Appendix A). Let P be the or bital period, G the gravitational constant, MS the stellar mass, R the cross section for Rayleigh scattering, and assume the plan etary orbits to be circular. The remaining parameters needed to compute refraction light curves are then given by (Hui & Seager along with Eqs. (1)(7). Equation (13) assumes that the eec tive surface is set by Rayleigh scattering. This is a reasonable assumption at a wavelength of 6500  in atmospheres devoid of clouds and hazes, which is what is assumed here unless other wise stated. Importantly, the model is insensitive to the opacity Fig. 1. Positions of the test planets presented in Table 2. The black line is the limit between weak and strong lensing; the region above the line source. The model is constructed such that the optical depth above R0 is zero and innite below. So, it is perfectly legitimate to ignore the Rayleigh scattering modelled by Eq. (13) and to set 0 and R0 manually. For example, if there are reasons to be lieve that a cloud deck obscures all paths below R0, then R0 can be set to the radius that corresponds to the altitude at the top of the cloud layer, in which case 0 would be the atmospheric mass We provide the properties of all test planets in Table 2, while their distribution in the BC-plane is shown in Fig. 1. Earth and Jupiter are used as references for the other ducial plan ets. The temperatures for Earth and Jupiter are chosen to be rep resentative of the majority of the atmosphere above the eec tive Rayleigh surface. A temperature of 255 K is deemed repre sentative of the atmosphere of the Earth and the temperature of 150 K for Jupiter is based on the temperature prole measured by the Galileo atmospheric probe (Sei et al. 1998, Fig. 28). The temperature of the 80-day super-Earth is assumed to scale as LS with respect to the Earth and the temperatures of the 20-day Jovian and 1-year Jovian with respect to Jupiter. The bulk density for the ducial super-Earth scenario is chosen based on the empirical relation of Weiss & Marcy (2014, Eq. (3)), which is tted to planets with radii in the range 1.54 R. This relation results in a mass of 3.9 M for a radius of 1.5 R, corresponding to a mean density of 6.4 g cm3. It is also assumed that the mass distributions within all planets are homogeneous. The average 05001000150020002500300035004000C100101102103104105B20-dayJovian80-daysuper-EarthEarth1-yearJovianJupiterBest-caseJovian A&A 609, A90 (2018) Fig. 2. Residuals for a light-curve model including refraction tted with a plain transit model without refraction for Jupiter. The dash-dotted red line is for a plain model with identical parameters as for the refraction light curve. The dashed green line is for a plain model with xed, correct limb-darkening coecients (LDCs). The solid blue line is a plain model tted with 10% freedom in the LDCs. The vertical black lines mark when the planet limb and centre cross the star limb. The reference time density of the Jovian planets is assumed to be equal to that of The purpose of the best-case planet is to put a limit on the maximum possible refraction strength. We x the orbital dis tance to the orbital distance of Jupiter because it sets the geo metrical deflection angle and is of little importance as long as the angle is small (Sect. 3.2). The radius is set to the Jupiter radius because an arbitrarily large signal strength can be achieved by increasing the radius with an appropriate rescaling of the other parameters. This leaves the atmospheric composition, which is set to pure H2; planet mass, which is set to 1 MJ; and the tem perature, which is set to 600 K. It is shown in Sect. 3.2 that the atmospheric composition, planet mass, and temperature are de generate. For example, a doubling in mass and temperature re sults in an identical light curve to that of the original parameters. The purpose of the best-case planet is that any planet at an orbital distance and with a radius equivalent to those of Jupiter yields a weaker refraction signal. In this sense, the best-case planet sce nario can be considered as an upper limit. We note that the Earth happens to show a stronger refraction signal for an Earth-sized planet on a 1-year orbit and can serve as a best-case terrestrial The primary question is what dierences are caused by at mospheric refraction in transit light curves. This can be stud ied by generating a light curve using the refraction model of Hui & Seager (2002) and then tting a model without refrac tion to it. Residuals (F) can then be computed by taking the refraction light curve and subtracting the tted model from it. Mathematically, F = FR  FM, where FR is the normalised predicted model flux and FM is the normalised flux of a t ted model. Figure 2 shows residuals for a refraction light curve Fig. 3. Refraction shoulders for the ve strongly lensing test planets. The y-axis is logarithmic for visual clarity. Blue is the reference Jupiter and is identical to the blue line in Fig. 2. Red is the Earth, yellow is the 80-day super-Earth, green is the 80-day Jovian, and magenta is the best case Jovian planet. The reference time is set to when the planet centre crosses the star limb, which is equivalent to the second vertical line in tted with plain transit light-curve models without refraction for Jupiter. The tted models are a plain transit light curve with the parameters xed to those used for generating the refraction light curve (dash-dotted red); with free inclination, orbital distance, and planet radius but xed LDCs (dashed green); and with free parameters and 10% freedom in the LDCs (solid blue). The ef fects of refraction are clearly seen as shoulders before and after transit and a flux decrease appears during transit. The shoulders only exist for planets in the strong lensing regime. The near side of a strongly lensing planet can occult the star before light starts being lensed into view by the far side of the planet, in which case the shoulders are suppressed. This is only relevant for systems close to the limit between strong and weak lensing. Most sys tems in the strong lensing regime will exhibit shoulders. The flux decrease of 15 parts per million (ppm; dash-dotted red) at mid transit for Jupiter is relatively large. For comparison, the corre sponding flux decrease for the 1-year Jovian case is (cid:46)1 ppm. One of the main points of Fig. 2 is to show that many of the in-transit refraction features are eliminated when tting a model with free impact parameter, planet radius, and star-planet distance (dashed green), especially when also allowing for some freedom in the Refraction shoulders are expected to be the most easily de tectable features and depend on several atmospheric parameters. Figure 3 shows refraction shoulders for the suite of test planets provided in Table 2, except for the 20-day Jovian, which does not exhibit shoulders as it is weakly lensing. The peak resid ual amplitudes and half-times for the planets are provided in Table 3. A half-time is dened as the time interval measured from when the residual amplitude is half of the peak amplitude to the time when the residual amplitude is at its peak. Systems with higher peak amplitudes are not necessarily easier to detect. For instance, when comparing the 80-day super-Earth with the Earth, the super-Earths refraction shoulders have a higher peak 15001000500050010001500t(min)1510505F(ppm)200150100500t(min)101100101F(ppm) D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres Fig. 4. Refraction signal strengths as functions of six dierent refraction parameters. The left panel is the 80-day super-Earth and the right panel is Jupiter. The x-axis is the ratio of the changing parameter to its original value. Red is wavelength, green is temperature, blue is planet mass, cyan is radius, magenta is orbital distance, and yellow is molecular weight (which overlaps with planet mass). The signal is measured over 60 min for the 80-day super-Earth and 600 min for Jupiter because of the dierent characteristic timescales. Table 3. Refraction shoulder properties. amplitude, but fade over shorter timescales than the shoulders of We explore the parameter space by studying the strength of refraction as a function of the following parameters: observ ing wavelength, temperature, mass, radius, orbital distance, and molecular weight. This is done by scaling each parameter with respect to the reference value that is provided in Table 2. The molecular weight is scaled by simply assuming that the mass of the atoms that constitute the atmosphere is changing. This means that the refractive properties, which are unique for each molecule, are assumed to be constant. Each parameter is as sumed to be independent of the other parameters that are used to dene a test planet, but propagates into the quantities that are cal culated using the scaled parameter, following the description in Sect. 2.2. For example, the mass is assumed to be constant when the radius is doubled, whereas a parameter such as the surface gravity would be reduced by a factor of 4 following Eq. (11). We thus dene the refraction signal strength St as the mean F over the t minutes just before rst contact. This serves as a measure of the shoulders detectability. Refraction signal amplitudes for various ranges of param eters are shown in Fig. 4. The very steep refraction strength drop-o at shorter wavelengths is primarily explained by the fourth-order wavelength dependence of Rayleigh scattering (see Eq. (12)). The radius R0 is set to the radius at which the optical depth due to Rayleigh scattering is unity. A quickly increasing scattering cross section at shorter wavelengths implies that the eective radius is shifted to higher altitudes where the density is lower. A secondary eect of decreasing wavelength is that the refractive coecient increases, but this eect is orders of mag nitude weaker than that of the increased Rayleigh cross section. The wavelength dependence flattens for long wavelengths be cause it only determines the capability of the atmosphere to de flect light. This enters the model through the B parameter, which is a deflection angle scaled by distance. Further increased de flection strength beyond the point where the planet is capable of deflecting light from its host star into the line of sight does not result in a signicantly stronger signal because the limiting fac tor becomes the projected area of the atmosphere. This means that B is eectively saturated. Figure 4 also shows that the refraction signal strength mono tonically increases with increasing orbital distance. The sig nal strength increases more steeply for shorter distances, then reaches a break and keeps increasing more slowly. The steep re gion is where the refraction strength is limited by the capability of the atmosphere to deflect the light at a large enough angle. The break is the distance at which the B parameter eectively satu rates, analogously to the break that is seen in the wavelength de pendence. The reason for a continued, slower refraction strength increase for large distances is that the transit timescale lengthens as a consequence of the Keplerian orbits of the planets. The refraction signal strength has a non-monotonous depen dence on some of the parameters. The signal shows the same be haviour with respect to the molecular weight, mass, and inverse temperature because these three parameters enter the equations through B and C identically. The parameters decrease the scale height and increases the density 0, both of which result in a larger density gradient of the atmosphere, which increases the 101100101Parametervaluerelativeto80-daysuper-Earth101100S60(ppm)101100101ParametervaluerelativetoJupiter101100101S600(ppm) A&A 609, A90 (2018) Fig. 5. Same as Fig. 3, but with an M4V red dwarf host star. The 1-year Jovian and best-case planet are excluded; they have no shoulders be cause they fall outside of the strong lensing regime. atmospheres capability of deflecting light. A competing eect is that a decreased scale height also gives a smaller projected at mospheric area, which results in a lower refraction signal. The balance between these two eects yields a parameter value for which the refraction strength is maximised. The density has a stronger dependence on molecular weight than the planet mass and inverse temperature, but this eect is cancelled by a corre sponding decrease in the refractive coecient . The strongest dependence of refraction amplitude is on the planet-to-star radius ratio. The refraction signal scales with planet radius because of the increased projected atmospheric area. Additional eects are that the scale height increases and atmospheric density decreases, which at a given radius renders the atmosphere unable to deflect light at large enough angles to be strongly lensing, resulting in a sharp cut-o. It is also possible that the radius is large enough for the near side of the planet to start occulting the star before the far side of the planet starts re fracting light into view. In this case, the strength of the refraction Refraction signal strength is dependent on host star proper ties, which is investigated by computing the refraction wings for the same test suite of planets but with a red dwarf host. The host star used is a ducial M4V dwarf star with a ra dius of 0.26, mass of 0.2, and luminosity of 0.0055 relative to the Sun (Reid & Hawley 2005; Kaltenegger & Traub 2009). The LDCs are set to 1 = 0.2 and 2 = 0.4 corresponding to the redder wavelengths of Berta-Thompson et al. (2015) because the flux of a red dwarf is assumed to be weighted towards longer wavelengths in the Kepler bandpass. The test planets are moved to an orbit at which they receive the same incident flux as for a Sun-like host. Only Earth, the 80-day super-Earth, and Jupiter out of the ve test planets are in the strongly lensing regime with the M4V dwarf host. The refraction shoulders are shown in Fig. 5. The two most striking dierences are that the ampli tudes increase by a factor of 5 and the relevant timescales are much shorter, which is clearly seen in Table 3. We can then compare the detectability of refraction features for Jupiter around the Sun and a Jupiter analogue around an M4V Fig. 6. Same as Fig. 3, but for the TRAPPIST-1 system at a wave length of 4.5 m corresponding to the infrared Spitzer photometry of Gillon et al. (2017). The planets are TRAPPIST-1b (red), c (green), d (blue), e (cyan), f (magenta), g (yellow), and h (black). dwarf star. Let  be the timescale, L host star luminosity, and as sume that the achievable photometric precision (P) scales as the square root of photon count. The precision is the relative un certainty from photon counting statistics that can be achieved within a given time interval. For this reason a factor of P1/2 is introduced because it is assumed that observations are performed whenever a transit occurs. In this case the precision follows The period around the dwarf star is six months compared to twelve years around the Sun and the refraction timescale is shorter by a factor of 274/43  6.4 (from Table 3) around the dwarf star. The ratio of precision around the Sun to precision around an M4V dwarf after twelve years of observations is then The signal strength around the Sun is expected to be weaker by roughly the same amount, see Table 3, so the predicted signal to-noise ratio (S/N) is similar for the Sun and for an M4V dwarf host. Importantly, the M4V S/N would of course decrease if not all transits are observed within the given time interval. We now focus on the more extreme case of the M8V dwarf TRAPPIST-1, which hosts seven Earth-size planets (Gillon et al. 2017). We compute the refraction shoulders for all TRAPPIST-1 planets at a wavelength of 4.5 m, corresponding to the infrared Spitzer photometry gathered for this object (Gillon et al. 2017). The nominal eect of limb darkening at 4.5 m is ignored. It is not reasonable to assume that Rayleigh scattering sets the eec tive surface at a wavelength of 4.5 m. Instead, the planet radius (R0) is set to the radius at which the pressure is 1 atm, conse quently the mass density 0 is set to the density at R0, instead of being computed using Eq. (13). We show the refraction shoul ders for all TRAPPIST-1 planets in Fig. 6 and their properties in Table 3. We use the parameters (except for planet masses) from Gillon et al. (2017), an assumed atmospheric composition 200150100500t(min)101100101F(ppm)6050403020100t(min)100101F(ppm) D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres 0.78N2 + 0.22O2, and planet masses from Wang et al. (2017). The seventh planet, TRAPPIST-1h, shows the strongest refrac tion signal with a peak excess amplitude of 40 ppm and a half time of 11 min. It is not reasonable to expect any residual signal to be stronger than 100 ppm for dierent assumptions concern ing the atmospheric composition or when considering the uncer tainty of the parameters. This value was determined by exploring the parameter space around TRAPPIST-1h. The S/N for planets around TRAPPIST-1 and the Sun can be compared using the precision dened by Eq. (14). The lu minosity of TRAPPIST-1 is 0.000524 L(cid:12) and the orbital period of TRAPPIST-1h is 18.8 days (Luger et al. 2017). The distance with an equivalent incident flux around the Sun would corre spond to a period of 1677 days. The peak amplitude of the re fraction shoulders of a TRAPPIST-1h analogue around the Sun is 1 ppm with a half-time of 73 min. Analogously to Eq. (15), the precision would be higher by a factor of around the Sun than TRAPPIST-1, which results in a comparable S/N given that the refraction signal is 1 ppm around the Sun compared to 40 ppm around TRAPPIST-1. Any in-transit, ingress, and egress signals are expected to be van ishing for weakly lensing planets because almost all of these re fraction eects can be compensated for by tting a plain transit model, especially when allowing for some freedom in the LDCs. This can be seen for Jupiter in Fig. 2, where the residuals are smaller than 1 ppm between the shoulders when tting a model with 10% freedom in the LDCs. The 20-day Jovian is a planet that is expected to have relatively strong lensing features even though it is weakly lensing, primarily because it is large and is further away from its host star than the closest close-in gi ants. Figure 7 shows the residuals for the 20-day Jovian planet along with a set of planets with similar parameters. The main point is that refraction features are not signicantly stronger and present on much shorter timescales compared to strongly lensing We then turn to observations where transit light curves from Kepler are stacked and tted in an attempt to detect refraction features. Kepler 30-min long-cadence simple aperture photome try (SAP) Jenkins et al. (2010, data release 25) are used for the analysis. The products in the SAP data used for our purpose are the timestamps, photometric fluxes, 1- statistical flux errors, and quality flags. Data for all Kepler objects of interest (KOIs) from quarters 0 through 17 were downloaded from NASA Ex oplanet Archive1 (NEA) on 23 January 2017. The SAP data have Argabrightening events mitigated (Witteborn et al. 2011) and cosmic rays removed. Background estimates are then sub tracted and the photometric fluxes are computed using optimal apertures. The SAP is a less processed version than the pre search data conditioning SAP (PDCSAP) (Stumpe et al. 2012; Smith et al. 2012), which has undergone additional artefact miti gation to account for instrument systematics. The choice of using SAP instead of PDCSAP is made because the artefacts primar ily aect longer timescales and additional high-level data re duction increases the risk of either removing refraction signals 1 http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu Fig. 7. Residuals for a set of 20-day Jovians after tting a plain light curve model with 10% freedom in the limb-darkening coecients to a refraction light curve. Blue is the reference planet with parameters given in Table 2. Red is double temperature, green is double mass, cyan is six times higher molecular weight, and yellow is double radius. The vertical black lines mark when the planet centre crosses the star limb. The reference time is set to mid-transit. or introducing weak systematics that could be confused with refraction-driven patterns in the data. Concerning false positives, Fressin et al. (2013) determined that 90% of all KOIs are real 4.1. Light curve reduction and tting The Kepler photometry data are reduced and tted in order to study any systematic residuals. All transits for each KOI are stacked and only data corresponding to ve transit durations cen tred on the transit are kept for each transit. All data points during transits of other KOIs in the same system or flagged as bad in the SAP are removed. Bad means that the flag SAP_QUALITY is dif ferent from 0. This conservative rejection criterion is chosen be cause systematic residuals were observed otherwise. Each transit is individually normalised by dividing the data with a quadratic polynomial that is tted to the out-of-transit baselines, which are dened as the rst and last 1.5 transit durations out of the ve transit durations. This means that the actual transit and half a transit duration before and after the transit are excluded. The additional margin is introduced because of potential refraction shoulders during the time intervals just before and after transit. The transit light-curve model of Mandel & Agol (2002) is then tted to the stack of all transits for each KOI. Transit timing variations (TTVs) are modelled by introducing a sinusoidal shift in time. Light curve tting is performed using the Levenberg Marquardt gradient descent function curve_fit in SciPy 0.13.3 with eight free parameters; star-planet distance, planet radius, in clination, two LDCs and three TTV parameters. The LDCs are given 10% freedom with respect to the values in NEA, which are derived using the method of Claret & Bloemen (2011) using the ATLAS model and least-squares method with eective temper atures and surface gravities from Huber et al. (2014). The three TTV parameters are the amplitude, frequency, and initial phase of the sinusoidal shift in time. A 5- clip is then applied to the data meaning that points with a photometric residual of more than ve sigma are removed. A second normalisation using the 15010050050100150t(min)105051015F(ppm) A&A 609, A90 (2018) same conservative baseline is then performed with the additional requirement that the normalisation function is tted to at least ve points on each side. A minimum of 14 data points between the baseline intervals are demanded to ensure that the reference level is well determined and that the transit contains a mean ingful amount of information. Transits with too few points are removed and the remaining stacked transits are retted. The accuracy of the photometric baseline for each transit is checked using two tests (Sheets & Deming 2014). Firstly, a line is tted to the rst interval and projected to the other side of transit. The transit is rejected if the mean of the projection at the time of the other baseline deviates by more than 0.001 (relative flux) from 0. It was veried that the choice of 0.001 resulted in a reasonable balance between number of rejected transits and light-curve quality. The projection is then reversed by tting to the second interval and projecting to the rst. It is possible that a transit light curve passes one but not both parts of the test. Secondly, it is required that the two lines from the projection test have slopes that are consistent with 0 at 3-. Only transits with both slopes being consistent with 3- are kept for further analysis. Light curve ts are then performed for each KOI to the stack of the transits that passed both tests. Finally, the deviations of the residuals are tested for systematics using the red-noise test presented in Sheets & Deming (2014). If the noise is solely composed of statistical fluctuations, such as for photon count ing, then log()  0.5 log(N), where  is the sample standard deviation and N is the size of the bins. The stacked residuals for all transits of a given KOI are binned with dierent bin sizes, allowing for tting of log() against log(N). Only KOIs with tted noise slopes in the range 0.8 to 0.3 are kept. This is an ecient way to lter KOIs with various systematic errors on A total of 2394 out of the 4707 KOI light curves pass all tests. The median reduced 2 value for the 2394 ts is 1.24 and the arithmetic mean is 1.47. The distribution of the number of degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) for the 2394 planets has a median of 8680 and arithmetic mean of 13 733. The primary condition that candidates failed was the requirement of 14 data points be tween the intervals used for baseline tting. This is essentially equivalent to requiring transits to be longer than three hours, which excludes 1743 KOIs. These are close-in planets and are not expected to show any refraction signal because of the geom etry of the planetary system and the refraction timescale com pared to the 30-min cadence of Kepler. This scenario is studied in Sect. 3.5; examples are shown in Fig. 7. A subset of 305 out of the 2394 tted KOIs are selected based on the following criteria. It is required that the planet radius is larger than 0.025 stellar radii and orbital period longer than 40 days. This is based on theoretical expectations of which planet popu lation would show the strongest refraction signals. The choice of having an orbital-period requirement instead of star-planet distance cut-o is because the period is more robust as it is measured directly in contrast to the star-planet distance, which is determined by the multi-dimensional light-curve t. It is re quired that tted planet radii should be smaller than 0.5 of the host star radius and that impact parameters be smaller than 1. These criteria mainly reject poorly tted KOIs. The subset of 305 large planets with long orbits will henceforth serve as the primary sample in the analysis. The median reduced 2 value for the 305 selected planets is 1.22 and the arithmetic mean is 1.46. Fig. 8. Binned residuals for the sample of 305 large planets on long orbits. The blue line is the theoretical prediction for a Jovian planet on a 1-year orbit. The precision of the stacked residuals is clearly not high enough to detect any refraction signal. Negative distances are before mid-transit and positive distances are after. The vertical black lines mark when the planet centre crosses the star limb. The distribution of the d.o.f. for the 305 planets has a median of 3358 and arithmetic mean of 3941. Figure 8 shows the stacked residuals for the selected sample of 305 large planets with long orbits. A total of 101 557 long cadence data points are stacked, with an average of 3174 points per bin. The bins are 0.125 wide in units of host star radii. The relatively long timescale is chosen to reveal refraction shoulders. The residual signal is expected to be of the order of 1 ppm. The precision of the stacked residuals is in the range 2.38.4 ppm, implying that any refraction shoulders are not expected to be de tectable. The increased noise towards mid-transit occurs primar ily because many projected KOI transits do not cross the central parts of the host star, resulting in fewer data points. The blue line is the theoretical prediction for a Jovian planet on a 1-year orbit. It is not a best-case scenario, but a signal in the averaged resid uals can most likely not be expected to be stronger than that of a 1-year Jovian. This is determined by exploring the parameter space and studying the residuals for many planets in the sample. Figure 9 shows the stacked residuals around ingress and egress for the sample of 305 large planets with long orbits. The sample is the same as in Fig. 8, but contrary to Fig. 8, the data in Fig. 9 have the x-axis in units of planet radii. Additionally, the distance on the x-axis is the distance from the stellar limb to the planet centre. A total of 28 911 data points are stacked, with an average of 903 per bin. The choice of unit is made because re fraction features around ingress and egress are expected to scale with planet size. This is in contrast with the refraction shoulders that scale with the planet-centre to star-centre distance. Further more, each bin is half a planet radius wide allowing for resolu tion of features on shorter timescales. The purpose of this gure is to reveal any potential features that are similar to those shown in Fig. 7. This would be the only refraction signal for planets that are not strongly lensing. The signal is expected to be a few tenths of ppm at Kepler long cadence and the precision of the stacked 2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0Planet-centretostar-centredistance(starradius)2015105051015F(ppm) D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres both with and without TTV modelling are skewed towards large values and have medians of 1.237 and 1.239, respectively. A TTV model with more freedom which allowed each transit to shift slightly in time and another model allowing each transit to shift with respect to the previous one were tested. Both were discarded because they introduced artefacts around ingress and egress. It is clear from Fig. 10 that no systematic residuals are observed out of transit. Any feature at a few ppm, such as signs of rings or moons, would be obvious. No signicant dierences to the presented results are ob served when dividing the KOIs into other subsets. This includes separating the sample into narrow ranges of star-planet distances and planet sizes. Eects of other tting parameters and selection Fig. 9. Binned residuals for the sample of large planets on long orbits. Contrary to Fig. 8, the x-axis is the distance from the stellar limb to the planet centre in units of planet radii. The blue line is the theoretical pre diction for a Jovian planet on a 20-day orbit. It is equivalent to the blue line in Fig. 4 as observed through the 30-min long cadence of Kepler. Negative distances are when planets are inside of the stellar disc and positive distances are outside. The vertical black lines mark when the planet limb and centre cross the star limb. Fig. 10. Same as Fig. 8, but for all 2394 KOIs that were tted. The blue line was computed for a 1-year Jovian and is not representative for the stacked planets. It is not the expected signal for the sample and is residuals is approximately 7 ppm. Thus, any refraction features are not expected to be detectable in this case. A blind search for any systematic residuals at a high pre cision in the sample of all 2394 tted KOIs is made by stack ing the residuals at a bin size of 0.125 star radii, shown in Fig. 10. The stack contains a total of 2.7 million long-cadence data points with an average of 84 thousand per bin. The preci sion during the transit ranges from 0.31 ppm. The residual ex cess centred on mid-transit possibly stems from inaccurate TTV tting. The three-parameter TTV model (Sect. 4.1) lowered the reduced 2 value from 1.481 for 5.34  106 d.o.f. to 1.469 for 5.46  106 d.o.f. (more d.o.f. with the TTV model because more transits passed all tests). The distributions of reduced 2 values 6.1. Connection with physical properties The refraction strength is very sensitive to the atmospheric scale height, composition, and density, potentially allowing for con straints on the atmosphere using solely photometric data. How ever, parameters such as the planet radius and orbital distance are more strongly constrained by other observational methods than Refraction also allows for constraints on the presence of clouds or hazes in the atmosphere. No refraction can be observed in atmospheric layers that are opaque due to clouds, hazes, or other obscuring weather conditions, implying that any refrac tion features can be taken as an indication of relatively clear skies. Searching for refraction residuals using photometry alone can therefore yield suitable targets for follow-up observations, as previously pointed out by Misra & Meadows (2014). An al ternative approach to detect refraction is to measure molecular feature wing steepness and relative depths of absorption features in near-infrared transmission spectra (Benneke & Seager 2013). Refraction shoulders, which are only possible in the strong lensing regime, are likely to be easier to observe than any ingress, egress, or in-transit residuals. Refraction will be very challenging to detect for weakly lensing systems because the timescales are much shorter. We note that the refraction resid uals are usually compensated for when adjusting a transit model to the data. These residuals can also be confused with stellar os cillations, starspots, and other minor eects such as rings and moons (Hippke 2015; Kipping et al. 2015; Heller 2017). An ad ditional source of error is the accuracy of the stellar surface brightness prole. The nature of the refraction shoulders, be ing out of transit, facilitates the interpretation of the refraction There is no simple relation between most physical param eters and refraction strength. It is a trade-o that depends on many parameters, as is shown in Sect. 3.2. The only predictor for refraction that is robust is if the system is strongly lens ing, but this does not immediately translate to signal strength. The exact position in the BC-plane is not simply correlated with refraction signal strength, although it does give some informa tion on qualitative features (e.g. the overall shape of the re fraction residuals), but contains little quantitative information. It is worth emphasising that refraction can set the eective ra dius only if the planet is strongly lensing, which is impor tant for transmission spectroscopy and is further discussed in Sect. 6.2. The largest refraction peak amplitudes for realistic planets orbiting Sun-like stars are on the order of 10 ppm, see Sect. 3 and Misra & Meadows (2014), but amplitudes as large Planet-centretostar-limbdistance(planetradius)31-1-33020100102030F(ppm)Ingress-3-1133020100102030Egress2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0Planet-centretostar-centredistance(starradius)2101234567F(ppm) A&A 609, A90 (2018) as 100 ppm have been reported for hypothetical ducial plan ets (Hui & Seager 2002; Sidis & Sari 2010). The Earth and the best-case Jovian can be used as examples of planets with high re fraction signal strength given their respective orbital distance and radius. The exact signal strength is sensitive to a set of parame ters and only seems to be strong for certain combinations, which means that refraction will be an important eect for a small num ber of planets that happen to be favourable for lensing. very weak close to strong absorption features or towards shorter wavelengths where Rayleigh scattering becomes important. In this case, any eects of refraction will be restricted to the low opacity regimes. The general guideline is that refraction does not obscure layers of the atmosphere if the planet is weakly lensing. Weak lensing could be restricted to certain wavelengths if the opacity is wavelength dependent or it could be restricted to some transits because of transient clouds or hazes. 6.2. Effects on transmission spectroscopy Refraction has attracted much attention as it could increase the eective radius of a planet and set a surface above the deepest layers of the atmosphere, which has critical con sequences for transmission spectroscopy (Garca Muoz et al. 2012; Btrmieux & Kaltenegger 2013, 2014; Btrmieux 2016; Btrmieux & Swain 2017). This eect is more pronounced for in-transit transmission spectra and it was emphasised by Misra et al. (2014) that deeper layers can be probed out of tran sit in such cases. There is a deep connection between refraction shoulders, which are observed out of transit, and the maximum depth reached by in-transit transmission spectroscopy. The rea son the deepest layers are obscured in cases where refraction sets an eective surface is that any light passing through the deep layers are deflected at a large enough angle such that no light from these regions reaches the observer while the planet is in transit. This also means that the light that penetrates deeply into the atmosphere can be observed near transit because of the large deflection angles, which was rst pointed out by Sidis & Sari (2010; their Figs. 2 and 3) and then also by Misra et al. (2014; their Fig. 9). The photon paths that pass the deep lay ers and consequently are deflected at large angles also constitute the refraction shoulders. Combining the above arguments means that weakly lensing planets cannot have an eective surface set by refraction because they are not capable of deflecting light at large enough angles. The scenario is more complicated if the planet is strongly lensing because some parts of the atmosphere become inaccessible during parts of or throughout the transit. It is therefore not necessary for atmospheric layers to be obscured throughout the entire transit, but that the eective exposure time is altitude dependent. Obscured deep layers can be recovered to some extent by observing the out-of-transit spectra in the refrac tion shoulders. The signal is weaker out of transit because of the geometry that eectively only exposes a narrow slit of the atmo sphere on the outer side of the planet to starlight. This means that refraction can have signicant eects on transmission spectra for strongly lensing planets even if refraction shoulders cannot be detected because of insucient photometric precision. In the most extreme cases, the deepest layers may not even be observ able out of transit because photons beyond a certain depth are eectively trapped by the atmosphere. This possibility is clearly conceptualised by Sidis & Sari (2010) who discuss the trapping of photons in transparent planets and the idea of a lower bound ary dened by Btrmieux & Kaltenegger (2015). Refraction is only weakly dependent on wavelength and is unlikely to introduce any artefacts that can be interpreted as spectral features in transmission spectra. The wavelength depen dence of refraction is incorporated in the model through R0 and the refractive coecient  (Appendix A). Only the latter is in herent to refraction, whereas the former is a radius set by ab sorption due to other processes. The inherent wavelength depen dence of refraction can be neglected for practically all realistic cases. However, it is possible that refraction becomes signi cant at wavelengths where the atmosphere is optically thin but Refraction features depend on host star parameters. Smaller stars result in larger relative amplitudes for all features because all normalised quantities scale with the ratio of projected planet area to star area. An extreme case of a peak amplitude of 950 ppm was reported by Misra & Meadows (2014) for a 200 K Saturn analogue around an M9V dwarf. The downside is that the lu minosity for small dwarf stars is much lower and orbits with the same incident flux as for Sun-like stars are closer-in, which means that the transit duration is shorter but repeats more of ten. The change in S/N of any refraction signal is much less than the peak amplitude might suggest when all parameters are taken into account, as shown in Sect. 3.3. Misra et al. (2014) and Btrmieux & Kaltenegger (2014) reported that deeper layers of planet atmospheres can be probed for analogous planets around cooler stars. This means that transmission spectra can contain information from dierent parts of the atmosphere although the S/N of photometric residuals is expected to be approximately the same for dierent host stars (Sect. 3.3). It was also shown that only three out of the ve strongly lensing planets around Sun-like hosts are strongly lensing if orbiting an M4V dwarf. Going from strongly to weakly lensing shows that deeper layers of atmospheres can be probed around dwarf stars than around Sun-like stars because weakly lensing planets are guaranteed to have their entire atmospheres exposed throughout transits, im plying that layers that are inaccessible around a Sun-like star are 6.4. Alternative refraction scenarios It is possible for the atmosphere of an exoplanet to lens a back ground star, analogously to gravitational microlensing. The re fraction model predicts innite amplication for background lensing, which clearly is an artefact of an idealisation. A more realistic guess would be an amplication of a factor of a few, based on observed gravitational microlensing light curves. The main diculty becomes the occurrence rate. The cross section is a few AU for gravitational lensing compared to a planet diam eter for atmospheric lensing. The brightness increase does not have to be mixed with the host star light if the lensing planet can be directly imaged, since the lensed images of the back ground star will be in the atmosphere of the exoplanet. Impor tantly, any lensed light would have been transmitted through the atmosphere, thereby having its spectral imprint. Another consequence of atmospheric lensing is that it is pos sible for planets with a near-transiting geometry to increase the flux without ever occulting the host star. This is just the eect of having a system that would have refraction shoulders if it was transiting, but instead showing a single flux excess peak when it passes the star without entering the stellar disc. No refraction signal is observed in the Kepler data when tran sits are stacked. The achieved precision is not high enough to  D. Alp and B.-O. Demory: Refraction in exoplanet atmospheres residual excess amplitude on atmospheric parameters and shows Acknowledgements. We thank the anonymous referee for the helpful comments that improved the manuscript. B.-O.D. acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation in the form of a SNSF Professorship (PP00P2 163967). This paper includes data collected by the Kepler mission. Funding for the Kepler mission is provided by the NASA Science Mission directorate. This research has made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program. This re search made use of Astropy, a community-developed core Python package for Astronomy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013). This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services. constrain refraction in the sample of large planets in long orbits, which is the population where refraction is expected to be sig nicant. It is still possible that refraction is relatively strong for a few targets, but these get suppressed when stacked with the rest of the sample. No attempt was made to constrain refraction in individual sources because computing refraction light curves is computationally intensive and the observational precision is clearly lower than predicted refraction shoulder amplitudes. A lack of refraction signatures in the stack of all tted plan ets is expected because the transit method is generally biased towards detecting planets on short orbital periods. The short planet-to-star distance is disadvantageous for refraction because it requires atmospheres to deflect light at larger angles. The only systematic residuals that can be seen in the stack of all planets is the central excess with a peak amplitude of 5 ppm. We have studied the eects of atmospheric refraction on transit light curves and searched for refraction signatures in data from the Kepler mission. Our main conclusions are the following: 1. Refraction residuals in photometric data can constrain phys ical properties of exoplanet atmospheres, such as density, scale height, and to some extent composition. 2. Out-of-transit refraction shoulders are the most robust and detectable residuals induced by atmospheric lensing and can reach peak residual excess amplitudes of approximately 10 ppm. More probable amplitudes are a few ppm or less for Jovians and sub-ppm for super-Earths. In-transit, ingress, and egress features are probably very challenging to de tect because of short timescales and degeneracy with other 3. The parameter space is highly complex and depends criti cally on a number of the parameters parametrising a plane tary system. Refraction will prove important for some targets whereas most planets will show very weak refraction signals. 4. Eects of refraction on transmission spectroscopy are deeply connected with refraction shoulders. Refraction does not set the eective radius if the planet is weakly lensing. The im pact of refraction on transmission spectra for strongly lens ing planets can vary greatly. 5. The detectability of refraction signals for planets orbiting red dwarfs cannot be assessed by the sole increase in peak resid ual amplitude. A combination of shorter timescale, shorter orbits, shorter star-planet distance, and host star properties results in similar values of S/N for planets orbiting Sun-like hosts. However, the altitudes probed can be dierent even though the S/N is approximately the same. 6. Refraction residuals cannot be observed in stacked Kepler light curves because of insucient photometric precision. The only systematic deviation across the entire Kepler sam ple is a central excess of a few ppm. While the present paper was in review, we learnt of a similar study by Dalba (2017). It also explores the dependence of peak Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558, Benneke, B., & Seager, S. 2013, ApJ, 778, 153 Berta-Thompson, Z. K., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2015, Nature, 527, 204 Btrmieux, Y. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 4051 Btrmieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2013, ApJ, 772, L31 Btrmieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2014, ApJ, 791, 7 Btrmieux, Y., & Kaltenegger, L. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 1268 Btrmieux, Y., & Swain, M. R. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2834 Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1999, Principles of optics: electromagnetic theory of propagation, interference and diraction of light (Cambridge University Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., Megeath, S. T., et al. 2005, ApJ, 626, 523 Claret, A., & Bloemen, S. 2011, A&A, 529, A75 Dalba, P. A. 2017, ApJ, 848, 91 Demory, B.-O. 2014, ApJ, 789, L20 Demory, B.-O., Gillon, M., Seager, S., et al. 2012, ApJ, 751, L28 Fressin, F., Torres, G., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766, 81 Garca Muoz, A., Zapatero Osorio, M. R., Barrena, R., et al. 2012, ApJ, 755, Gillon, M., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Demory, B.-O., et al. 2017, Nature, 542, 456 Griths, D. 1999, Introduction to Electrodynamics (Prentice Hall) Heller, R. 2017, ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1701.04706] Hippke, M. 2015, ApJ, 806, 51 Hubbard, W. B., Fortney, J. J., Lunine, J. I., et al. 2001, ApJ, 560, 413 Huber, D., Silva Aguirre, V., Matthews, J. M., et al. 2014, ApJS, 211, 2 Hui, L., & Seager, S. 2002, ApJ, 572, 540 Jenkins, J. M., Caldwell, D. A., Chandrasekaran, H., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, L120 Kaltenegger, L., & Traub, W. A. 2009, ApJ, 698, 519 Kipping, D. M., Schmitt, A. R., Huang, X., et al. 2015, ApJ, 813, 14 Koch, D. G., Borucki, W. J., Basri, G., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, L79 Luger, R., Sestovic, M., Kruse, E., et al. 2017, Nature Astron., 1, 0129 Mandel, K., & Agol, E. 2002, ApJ, 580, L171 Misra, A. K., & Meadows, V. S. 2014, ApJ, 795, L14 Misra, A., Meadows, V., & Crisp, D. 2014, ApJ, 792, 61 Reid, I. N., & Hawley, S. L. 2005, New light on dark stars: red dwarfs, low-mass stars, brown dwarfs (Praxis Publishing Ltd.) Seager, S., & Sasselov, D. D. 2000, ApJ, 537, 916 Sei, A., Kirk, D. B., Knight, T. C. D., et al. 1998, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 22857 Sheets, H. A., & Deming, D. 2014, ApJ, 794, 133 Sidis, O., & Sari, R. 2010, ApJ, 720, 904 Smith, J. C., Stumpe, M. C., Van Cleve, J. E., et al. 2012, PASP, 124, 1000 Stumpe, M. C., Smith, J. C., Van Cleve, J. E., et al. 2012, PASP, 124, 985 Sudarsky, D., Burrows, A., & Pinto, P. 2000, ApJ, 538, 885 Wang, S., Wu, D.-H., Barclay, T., & Laughlin, G. P. 2017, ApJ, submitted Weiss, L. M., & Marcy, G. W. 2014, ApJ, 783, L6 Witteborn, F. C., Van Cleve, J., Borucki, W., Argabright, V., & Hascall, P. 2011, in Techniques and Instrumentation for Detection of Exoplanets V, Proc. SPIE, Appendix A: Cauchys equation Cauchys equation is used to compute the refractive coecient () for dierent atmospheric compositions. The refractive coef cient is not to be confused with the refractive index (n), which are related by n = 1 + , where  is the density. The refractive coecient is given by  = A1(1 + B1/2), where A1 is the co ecient of refraction, B1 is the coecient of dispersion, and  is the wavelength. Coecients for some common gases are pro vided in Table A.1. The refractive coecients are calculated at a temperature of 0 C and pressure of 1 atm, and are assumed to be constant over the relevant temperatures and pressures. Table A.1. Cauchys equation coecients. Notes. Values are given for gases at a temperature of 0 C and pressure of 1 atm (Born & Wolf 1999; Griths 1999). The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10  2018. The American Astronomical Society. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aad739 The 30 Year Search for the Compact Object in SN 1987A , Peter Challis7, Phil Cigan8, Aleksandar Cikota9 , Robert P. Kirshner7,10, Jacco Th. van Loon11 Patrice Bouchet16,17, Roger Chevalier18 , Haley Gomez8, Hans-Thomas Janka4 , Jon Marcaide21, Mikako Matsuura8 1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden; dalp@kth.se , Michael Gabler4, Francesco Taddia2, and J. Craig Wheeler24 2 Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 3 National Radio Astronomy Observatory and University of Virginia, 520 Edgemont Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA 4 Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany 5 Tuorla observatory, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Turku, Vislntie 20, FI-21500 Piikki, Finland 6 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA 7 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 8 School of Physics and Astrophysics, Cardiff University, Queens buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, UK 9 European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Strasse 2, D-85748 Garching, Germany 10 Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, 1661 Page Mill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA 11 Lennard-Jones Laboratories, Keele University, ST5 5BG, UK 12 Department of Physics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong 13 Department of Physics, Box 19059, 108 Science Hall, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA 14 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA 15 Sterrenkundig Observatorium, Universiteit Gent, Krijgslaan 281 S9, B-9000 Gent, Belgium 16 IRFU, CEA, Universit Paris-Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 17 CNRS/AIM, Universit Paris Diderot, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 19 Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA), Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA 18 Department of Astronomy, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400325, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4325, USA 20 Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, 50 St. George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada 21 Departmento de Astronomia y Astrosica, Universidad de Valencia, Dr. Moliner 50, Burjassot-Valencia, E-46100, Spain 22 Laboratory for Observational Cosmology, Code 665, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA 23 International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research (ICRAR), University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia 24 Department of Astronomy and McDonald Observatory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA Received 2018 May 11; revised 2018 July 27; accepted 2018 July 28; published 2018 September 13  - erg s1 cm2 Hz1) at 213 GHz, 1 Le (6 Despite more than 30 years of searching, the compact object in Supernova (SN) 1987A has not yet been in SN1987A using millimeter, near-infrared, detected. We present new limits on the compact object from ALMA, VLT, HST, and Chandra. The limits are optical, ultraviolet, and X-ray observations the optical if our line of sight is free of ejecta dust, and 1036 erg s1 (2  - erg s1 cm2 Hz1) in 210keV X-rays. Our X-ray limits are an order of magnitude less constraining than previous limits because we use a more realistic ejecta absorption model based on three-dimensional neutrino-driven SN explosion models. The allowed bolometric luminosity of the compact object is 22 Le if our line of sight is free of ejecta dust, or 138 Le if dust-obscured. Depending on assumptions, these values limit the effective temperature of a neutron star (NS) to 4< 8 MK and do not exclude models, which typically are in the range 34 MK. For the simplest accretion model,  Me yr1, which excludes most predictions. For pulsar the accretion rate for an efciency  is limited to 10 11 activity modeled by a rotating magnetic dipole in vacuum, the limit on the magnetic eld strength (B) for a given G s2, which rmly excludes pulsars comparable to the Crab. By combining information about radiation reprocessing and geometry, we infer that the compact object is a dust-obscured thermally emitting NS, which may appear as a region of higher-temperature ejecta dust emission. Key words: stars: black holes  stars: neutron  supernovae: individual (SN 1987A) Supernova (SN) 1987A provides a unique opportunity to observe the development of an SN and the subsequent early evolution of a very young SN remnant SN1987A, see Arnett et al. 1989; McCray 1993; McCray & Original content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. Fransson 2016). SN1987A is expected to have created a compact object. The existence of supported by the detection of the initial neutrino burst, which was observed by Kamiokande II(Hirata et al. 1987, 1988) and the IrvineMichiganBrookhaven detector(Bionta et al. 1987; Bratton et al. 1988), with a possible supporting detection by the Baksan Neutrino Observatory (Alekseev et al. 1987; Alexeyev et al. 1988). While the prompt neutrino emission is attributed to the formation of a compact object, more than 30 years of diligent searches across the electromagnetic spectrum have  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 1. Position estimates of SN1987A plotted on the HST/ACS F625W 2006 December 6 observation. The left panel shows the tted hotspot locations as green dots, which are determined by tting two-dimensional (2D) Gaussians within the black rectangles. The blue ellipse is the best-t ellipse to the green dots and the (very small) white rectangle is the entire region shown in the right panel. The white circle is the search region corresponding to a kick velocity of 800 km s1 at 10,000days (2014 July 11). The cyan square is the radio centroid position (t of a spherical shell to radio data) and the yellow diamond is the progenitor position reported by Reynolds et al. (1995) after correcting for the proper motion of the position of SN1987A in the LMC(Kallivayalil et al. 2013; van der Marel & Kallivayalil 2014; van der Marel & Sahlmann 2016). The vertical gray lines show the area covered by the ve slits of the HST/STIS observations and the horizontal gray lines represent the STIS extraction region. The right panel shows the estimated positions of SN1987A based on the 33 HST observations from 2003 to 2016 by tting ellipses to the hotspots. The size of the right panel is 1412 mas. The blue points denote positions from B-band images and the red points denote positions from R-band images. The black solid ellipse is the 1 condence contour of the best estimate (black cross): green pentagon is the position (5 mas from the favored position) based on ts using an elliptic annulus as described in the text. failed to observe it. Being able to observe the compact object in SN1987A would provide valuable insight into the explosion mechanisms of SNe, the connection between SN progenitors and compact objects, and the early evolution of neutron stars (NSs). This has implications for our description of fundamental physics in the strong-gravity regime. Previous studies have been able to indirectly infer some properties of the compact object in SN1987A. The progenitor star, Sanduleak69 202(Sanduleak 1970), was identied as a B3 Ia blue supergiant(Kirshner et al. 1987; Walborn et al. 1987; West et al. 1987; White & Malin 1987). The zero-age main-sequence mass of the progenitor is estimated to be in the range 1622 Me, and the progenitor mass is estimated to be 14 Me at the time of explosion (Fransson & Kozma 2002; Smartt et al. 2009; Utrobin et al. 2015; Sukhbold et al. 2016). Sanduleak69 202 would create an NS, which is supported by the prompt neutrino burst(Burrows 1988) and SN simulations (Fryer 1999; Perego et al. 2015; Ertl et al. 2016; Sukhbold et al. 2016). However, some authors have advanced the hypothesis that a black hole (BH) was created in SN1987A(Brown et al. 1992; Blum & Kushnir 2016). The mass estimates of the possible NS are only loosely constrain ing. Early estimates based on the neutrino signal predict a baryonic NS mass in the range 1.21.7 Me(Burrows 1988), explosion simulations calibrated to SN1987A estimate a baryonic mass of 1.66 Me(Perego et al. 2015), and a lower limit on the baryonic mass of 1.7 Me has been placed through constraints on explosive silicon burning by measuring Ni Fe ratios(Jerkstrand et al. 2015). The detection of the compact object is made difcult by the light from the ejecta and surrounding circumstellar medium (CSM). The CSM is in the form of a triple-ring structure, possibly created by a binary merger 20,000 years before explosion (Blondin & Lundqvist 1993; Morris & Podsia dlowski 2007, 2009) or a rapidly rotating progenitor(Chita et al. 2008). The brightest of the three rings is the inner equatorial ring (ER), which is seen in Figure 1. It appears 43~ (Tziamtzis et al. 2011). elliptical because it is inclined by The outer parts of the SN ejecta reached the ER by 1995. The interactions gave rise to the rst hotspot(Lawrence et al. 2000) and the ER subsequently brightened during several years across the entire electromagnetic spectrum(Ng et al. 2013; Fransson et al. 2015; Arendt et al. 2016; Frank et al. 2016). However, the mid-infrared emission from the ER started decreasing in 2010(MIR, Arendt et al. 2016), the optical emission started decreasing in 2009(Fransson et al. 2015), and the soft X-ray luminosity flattened around 2013(Frank et al. 2016). The radiation from central ejecta is also affected by the ER. Larsson et al. (2011) showed that the brightening of the SN ejecta in the likely is explained by the increase of X-ray emission from the ER. However, the decay of 44Ti is still expected to be the dominant energy source in the innermost parts of the ejecta, where the compact object is expected to reside(Fransson et al. 2013; Larsson et al. 2013). In this paper, we place limits on the compact object in Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) at millimeter wave the Very Large Telescope (VLT) in near-infrared (NIR), Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in optical and ultraviolet (UV), and Chandra in X-rays. We then discuss the implications of the limits on physical properties of the compact object and prospects for future observations. This paper is organized as follows. The observations and data reduction are presented in Section 2 and the analysis methods are presented in Section 3. We present our compact  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 a Different exposures for individual segments. b Integrated from single exposures of 120 s. c Integrated from single exposures of 90 s. d Integrated from single exposures of 600 s. e Sum of 8098 s for each of the ve slits. f Only zeroth-order image and CCD spectrum used for the analysis. object limits in Section 4 and discuss the implications of our results in Section 5. Finally, we summarize and list the main conclusions in Section 6. In an accompanying paper(Alp et al. 2018), we estimate the X-ray absorption in SN ejecta using three-dimensional (3D) neutrino-driven explosion models. 2. Observations and Data Reduction All observations are summarized in Table 1. We use the most recent observations available at unless previous ones have better quality. It is possible that older observations place more stringent constraints if the compact object was brighter in the past. We briefly inspect an X-ray observation from 2000 (Section 2.6), in addition to a detailed study of the 2015 X-ray observation, but observations of SN1987A is beyond the scope of this paper. Some consequences of the temporal evolution of the compact object are discussed in Section 5.5. We also analyze a circular polarimetric observation using the FOcal Reducer and low dispersion Spectrograph 2 (FORS2) at the VLT, which did not detect any signicant polarization. The polarization observation is presented in Appendix A. ALMA observations of SN1987A (Table 1) at 1.3mm (Band 6, 211275 GHz) were performed on two different epochs: Cycle 2 modest angular resolution data (2013.1.00280; 23770 k) were obtained on 2014 September 2. The quasar J0519-4546 (05:19:49.72, 45:46:43.85; 0.75 Jy at 234 GHz) was the absolute flux calibrator, which is monitored regularly and calibrated against solar system objects by the observatory. The quasar J0635-7516 (06:35:46.51, 75:16:16.82; 0.68 Jy at 234 GHz) was the phase calibrator. 1908600 k) were obtained from 2015 November 1 to 15 using J0601-7036 (06:01:11.25, 70:36:08.79; 0.70 Jy at 224 GHz; 0.58 Jy at 253 GHz) as Data from 211 to 213 GHz used J0519-4546 (0.75 Jy at 224 GHz) as the absolute flux calibrator. Data at 247 GHz used J0519-4546 for one execution, and J0334-4008 (03:34:13.65, 40:08:25.10; 0.44 Jy at 253 GHz) for a second execution. All of these quasar calibrators are observed regularly as part of the observatory calibration network, so we can evaluate the temporal evolution of each to estimate the uncertainty in the absolute flux calibrator due to quasar variability. We can then compare the derived flux densities of the phase calibrator to the monitoring observations to estimate the uncertainty in fluxscale to the science target. These combined yield an estimated absolute flux calibration uncertainty of better We use the Common Astronomy Software Application25 (CASA, McMullin et al. 2007) to calibrate and image the interferometric data into 3 images with spectral ranges deemed line emission: 211.83213.25 GHz, 232.55233.52 GHz, and 245.95247.20 GHz(see Figure 2 of Matsuura et al. 2017). For imaging we use the task tclean with multiscale deconvolution with scales of 0 and 7 times the 62 mas2 pixel size. The FWHM of the restoring beam of the 213 GHz image is 5740 mas2 (major and minor axis), the 233 GHz image 4930 mas2, and the 247 GHz image 4034 mas2. Analysis of the phase rms during the observa tion with knowledge of the ALMA calibration efcacy(Asaki et al. 2014) leads us to conclude that the astrometric accuracy is better than 10 mas. After image reconstruction, the real-space  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 images are transformed by a linear mapping such that the beams are circular for optimal performance with the nding algorithm, which is described in Appendix B. SN1987A has been observed for a total of six epochs between 2006 and 2017 with the Nasmyth Adaptive Optics System Near-Infrared Imager and Spectrograph (NACO) at the VLT(Lenzen et al. 2003; Rousset et al. 2003). Full details of the observations and data reductions are given in A. Ahola et al. (in preparation). For the present work we selected only a single epoch of H-band and Ks-band imaging of the highest image quality (Table 1). The H-band observation is from 2010 October, with a total on-source integration time of 2160 s. The Ks-band observation is from 2012 December, with a total on source integration time of 2070 s. The images are reduced using standard recipes from the ESO pipeline(Schreiber et al. 2004; Modigliani et al. 2007) and IRAF. A horizontal striping pattern present in the images is removed by a custom script that creates a one-dimensional (1D) image from the medians of the image pixels along the detector rows. This 1D image is then subtracted from the rows of the original image. A running sky subtraction is performed for sets of three stripe-removed exposures at a time using an ESO pipeline recipe. The three sky-subtracted exposures are aligned and stacked by the recipe yielding one sky-subtracted image per running set of three exposures. This process is repeated until all of the sets of three exposures have been sky-subtracted such that N exposures resulted in N  2 sky-subtracted images. The sky-subtracted images are nally aligned based on the centroid coordinates of a bright star manually selected in each image and subsequently median-averaged. The stripe removal script is run once more for the stacked image to remove any remaining stripes and bands left by the rst stripe removal step. Flux calibrations of the NACO observations are made using star2 as26 a reference. We conrmed that star 2 is not variable using observations from 1997 to 2006 from the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer at F160W and F205W lters. The NACO H and Ks fluxes of star2 are obtained by converting27 the H and Ks fluxes from 2MASS(Cohen et al. 2003; Skrutskie et al. 2006). The accuracy of this zero-point construction is checked by repeating the 2MASSESO comparison for star 3.28 The relative difference in the flux is a factor of 1.06 in the H band and 0.82 in the Ks band. We note that star 3 shows variability within a factor of two in the optical(Walborn et al. 1993), which is conrmed by regular HST observations in the R and B bands over the past two decades. The SINgle Faint Object Near-IR Investigation (SINFONI) Integral Field Spectrograph at the VLT(Eisenhauer et al. 2003; Bonnet et al. 2004) observed SN1987A in the H and K bands between 2014 October and December (Table 1). SINFONI resolution in a small eld of view (FOV). We only use the spatial resolution to extract spectra from a search region (Section 3.2). The limits are then constructed from the 27 http://www.ipac.caltech.edu/2mass/releases/allsky/doc/sec6_4b.html extracted spectra. The data are reduced using the standard ESO pipeline(Schreiber et al. 2004; Modigliani et al. 2007) with the improved subtraction of the OH airglow emission following Davies (2007). A more detailed presentation of the processing of these particular observations is provided by Larsson et al. (2016) and a comprehensive description of SINFONI data reduction can be found in Kjr et al. (2010). Contaminating light from the ER is subtracted from the spectra of the central region. The lines from the ER have an FWHM of 300 km s1 and the lines from the central ejecta have an FWHM of 2500 km s1(Fransson et al. 2015; Larsson et al. 2016). Even though the ejecta are clumpy and illumination is non-uniform, the line proles of the ejecta are relatively smooth and much broader than the sharp narrow lines from the ER. The difference allows us to subtract the ER spectra from the central spectra by scaling the ER spectra such that they cancel the narrow components of the central spectra. Backgrounds are constructed from the cleanest available regions in the relatively small FOV of SINFONI. These are then subtracted from the extracted central spectra. It is veried that different choices of background regions do not signi cantly alter the results. The signal-to-background ratio (S/B) for the low continuum level is 0.88 in the H band and 2.31 in SN1987A was observed using Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) in 2009 December in six lters; F225W, F336W, F438W, F555W, F625W, and F814W (Table 1). We choose these observations from 2009 because they provide the most complete wavelength coverage at a recent epoch. Together, the six lters provide coverage over the 21508860 wavelength interval. The latest WFC3 NIR observations are from 2011 January in the F110W and F160W lters. The latest wide-lter observations with high quality at the time of analysis are from 2015 May in the F438W and F625W lters. All observations were performed using the four-point box dither pattern and drizzled(Fruchter & Hook 2002) onto a nal pixel size of 252 mas2 using a value for the DrizzlePac (Gonzaga et al. 2012) parameter pixfrac of either 0.6 or 0.7. Cosmic-ray rejection is also performed when drizzling to combine the dithered exposures. The flux zero-points for all WFC3 images are taken from the IRAF/STSDAS package (Bushouse & Simon 1994, calibration database Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) observed SN1987A using the 530010000 (Table 1). The STIS observations were described in detail in Larsson et al. (2016). Here, we provide additional information on astrometry and background subtrac tion because of their importance to the compact object limit. The observations were made at ve adjacent slit positions, as shown in Figure 1. Each slit is 100 mas wide and oriented in the northsouth direction. The position of SN1987A that is presented in Section 3.1 is very close to the dividing line between the second and third slits. Contaminating light from the ring is subtracted from the spectrum of the central region using the same method used  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 for SINFONI (Section 2.3). In addition, a background is extracted from regions north and south of subtracted from the ejecta spectrum. The S/B is 0.74 for the low continuum level. The background is extracted from 75 pixel rows (50 mas pixel1) in three regions both north and Chandra observed SN1987A on 2015 September 17 (Obs. ID 16756, Table 1), utilizing the Advanced CCD Imaging Spectrometer(ACIS, Garmire et al. 2003) S-array equipped with the High-Energy Transmission Grating(HETG, Canizares et al. 2005). The ACIS detector provides imaging capabilities with an angular resolution of 700 mas (FWHM) and a moderate energy resolution of 100eV at 2keV. The spatial resolution is just enough to resolve SN1987A, which allows us to extract a spectrum of the central region that can be used to set an upper limit on the compact object. Among many Chandra observations(e.g., Frank et al. 2016), we choose this particular observation because it was the latest observation at the time of analysis, which implies that the absorption toward the center is the lowest (Appendix C). Contamination on the ACIS optical blocking lter(OBF, ODell et al. 2013) has previously led to inaccurate flux measurements(e.g., Park et al. 2011; Helder et al. 2013). Frank et al. (2016) have veried that the OBF contamination is now well-modeled using the High Resolution Camera/Low Energy Transmission Grating observation of SN1987A from 2015 March 14 (Obs. ID 16757), which does not suffer from the OBF contamination. Only data from the zeroth-order image in energy range 0.310keV of the 2015 September 17 ACIS/ HETG observation are used in this analysis. The data are reduced following standard procedures using CIAO 4.9 and CALDB 4.7.7(Fruscione et al. 2006). No background flares are observed resulting in a total exposure of 66ks with 11,000 source counts. XSPEC 12.9.1p(Arnaud 1996) is used for the spectral analysis and all extracted spectra are binned with a minimum of 20 counts per bin. A background is extracted from an annulus with an inner radius of 15 and outer radius of 30. The background is negligible for the spectra of SN1987A because of the high source count rates and small spatial region of interest. The HETG provides dispersed spectra and also reduces pileup in the zeroth-order image(Helder et al. 2013; Frank et al. 2016). The dispersed spectra are used to verify that pileup is not signicant in the zeroth-order CCD spectrum and we nd that bad grades 1, 5, and 7 combine to be 3% of the total level 1 source counts.29 This indicates that the level of pileup is low enough to not signicantly affect our analysis. A more detailed treatment of pileup is difcult because SN1987A is marginally resolved and we primarily use the spectrum from the region inside the ER, which is smaller than a single ACIS pixel. Pileup properties could be different for the ER and the ejecta because the count rate is signicantly higher in the pixels neighboring the few central pixels. However, the grades are assigned based on 33 pixel islands. The way in which these effects combine requires custom methods, which would be excessive for our Below, we describe the methods used to determine upper limits on the compact object in SN1987A. The position of SN1987A and the spatial regions in which we search for the compact object are described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. Sections 3.33.5 present how the image and spectral limits at millimeter, UV, optical, and NIR (UVOIR) wavelengths are determined. The spread light in the X-ray observation, which complicates the computation of the X-ray limits, is described in Section 3.6. Finally, the X-ray ejecta absorption model based on 3D neutrino-driven SN explosion models(Alp et al. 2018) is described in Appendix C, and the spatial alignment of the images is described in Appendix D. The source luminosity limits based on the imaging analysis rely on the assumption that the compact object is a point source. The limits from the spectral analysis in UVOIR are based on the assumption that the compact object emission is a the X-ray limits are constructed by assuming certain spectra for the compact object. The distance to SN1987A is taken to be 51.2kpc (Panagia et al. 1991; Gould & Uza 1998; Panagia 1999; Mitchell et al. 2002). All two-sided condence intervals are 1 and all one-sided upper limits are 3 unless otherwise stated. We need an accurate position estimate of SN1987A because we only search for the compact object in a kick region that has a radius of 100 mas (Section 3.2). Therefore, it is important that the position estimate of SN1987A is accurate to 10 mas. The position of SN1987A refers to the projected position of star at current epochs. The position is determined by tting an ellipse to the hotspots in the ER in HST images. This assumes that the progenitor is located at the center of the ring of hotspots. The rst step is to tie the HST images to Gaia data release 1(DR1, Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016b, 2016a) because the error of astrometry of HST is relatively large. This is done by mapping two unsaturated stars.30 The uncertainties in the positions of the two reference stars in the Gaia archive are accuracies of the localizations of the stars in the HST images All 33 observations from 2003 to 2016 in the B (F435W, F438W, and F439W) and R (F625W and F675W) bands (presented in Appendix E) are used for determining the position. Observations from before 2003 are excluded because the low number of hotspots present before this time make the ts inaccurate. The hotspots are dened using the F625W 2006 December 6 observation because it provides the best spatial resolution at an epoch when most hotspots were bright (Fransson et al. 2015). Two-dimensional (2D) Gaussians are tted to the 26 hotspots, shown in Figure 1. The hotspots are located in the other observations by tting a radial, one dimensional (1D) Gaussian along the angles dened by the 2D ts in the F625W 2006 December 6 observation. This ensures that the same hotspots are found in all observations. Ellipses are then tted to the hotspots in all best-t estimates of the position of SN1987A from the 33 images agree within 25 mas and are shown in Figure 1 (right). the 33 best-t coordinates are 29 http://cxc.harvard.edu/proposer/POG/html/chap6.html 30 Gaia source ID: 4657668007091797248, 4657668075811272704.  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 J2015.0), where the 1s uncertainties are estimated by boot strapping the hotspot locations. Unless otherwise stated, all presented coordinates are at epoch J2015.0 and in the reference frame of Gaia DR1, which is effectively equivalent to ICRF (the realization of ICRS) for the current level of precision. This will henceforth be adopted as the position of SN1987A in We emphasize that the reported condence interval only the statistical uncertainty. Fitting to the ER continuum in the ALMA observation results in a position offset of approximately 60 mas to the east, but the ER is more diffuse at millimeter wavelengths and we choose to use the optical observations. This is likely to be the best approach because the hotspots are well-dened point sources, whereas the millimeter emission originates from a larger volume above and below the optically emitting ring. The systematic error introduced by assuming the hotspots to be located in an ellipse centered on the supernova position is checked by tting an elliptic annulus with a Gaussian radial prole to the entire inner ring. This elliptical band is also allowed to rotate in the sky plane and has a sinusoidal intensity along the azimuth. This describes the inner ring as a continuum rather than as a collection of point sources and serves as a relatively independent estimate of the position. The center obtained using an elliptical J2015.0), as shown in Figure 1 (right, green pentagon). This position is offset by 5 mas from the favored position of The hotspot coordinates can be compared to the best estimate of the location of the progenitor star Sanduleak69 202; a = Reynolds et al. 1995). In addition, Reynolds et al. (1995) used observations by the Australia Telescope Compact Array from 1992 October 21 and 1993 January 45 at 8.8 GHz and reported ( ) (ICRF J1991.9). The aforementioned coordi nates are those reported by Reynolds et al. (1995). To compare with our estimates in Figure 1, the positions of Reynolds et al. (1995) are corrected for the displacement between the epochs of observation. The proper motion of the position of SN1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) is 46 mas east and 13 mas north (Kallivayalil et al. 2013; van der Marel & Kallivayalil 2014; van der Marel & Sahlmann 2016). This assumes that the proper motion of Sanduleak69 202, and consequently also SN1987A, conforms to the expected motion of its location within the LMC. An extended region is searched because the compact object created by SN1987A is expected to have a kick velocity caused by the asymmetric explosion. Typical 3D kick velocities of pulsars are 400 km s1(Hobbs et al. 2005; Faucher-Gigure & Kaspi 2006). However, extreme cases of velocities up to 1600 km s1 have been observed(Cordes et al. 1993; Chatterjee & Cordes 2002, 2004; Hobbs et al. 2005). When searching for a point source in SN1987A, we assume a sky-plane projected kick velocity of 800 km s1, which corresponds to a search radius of our observations. This is a trade-off between having to search an excessively large region and the risk of not including the The effects of different choices of kick velocity are relatively small. For a kick of 1600 km s1, the average correction factor to the six HST limits from 2009 (Section 4.2) is 1.07. For a more typical speed of 400 km s1 the corresponding factor is 0.86. The reason for the small difference is that the brightness is relatively uniform and the search algorithm is dependent on both surrounding morphology and brightness. This means that limits are not directly proportional to the local brightness. The effect of interstellar reddening at UVOIR wavelengths is corrected for using the model of Cardelli et al. (1989) with RV=3.1 and E(B  V )=0.19. The parameters are chosen based on the work by France et al. (2011), which takes several studies of extinction to SN1987A and the LMC into consideration (Fitzpatrick & Walborn 1990; Walker & Suntzeff 1990; Scuderi et al. 1996; Gordon et al. 2003; Michael et al. 2003). The uncertainty in the de-reddening is approximately 20% below 3000, less than 10% in the optical, and less than Large amounts of dust have been detected in the ejecta of SN1987A(Matsuura et al. 2011, 2015; Indebetouw et al. 2014; Dwek & Arendt 2015; Wesson et al. 2015), but we do not attempt to correct for it using the same method used for interstellar reddening. The primary reason for this is that the spatial distribution of the ejecta dust is poorly constrained(e.g., Dwek & Arendt 2015; Wesson et al. 2015). Our treatment of ejecta dust is explained in Section 4.1. Image limits are obtained from ALMA, VLT/NACO, and HST/WFC3. The same method is used for all observations, apart from two small differences for ALMA. The differences are how the PSFs of the instruments are determined and how the spatial positions are chosen. For the interferometric ALMA images, the PSFs are the well-dened reconstruction beams (Section 2.1). The PSFs for the UVOIR images are created using the IRAF/DAOPHOT(Stetson 1987) package following the guidelines for tting PSFs in Davis (1994). An empirical PSF is generated for each observation by tting to well-isolated stars. A Gaussian is selected as the analytical component with a linear lookup table. The quality of the PSFs is checked by estimating the residuals when subtracting best ts from the original images. The residuals are less than 5% of the counts for most stars. In addition, each individual PSF model is visually inspected for defects. The ALMA limits are not required to be from the same point because they are treated as three independent limits in the analysis. In contrast, UVOIR image limits from the same epoch are at the same spatial position for the different bands. The points are chosen such that the highest total flux allowed by the limits in all bands is maximized and allows us to combine the limits to constrain spectra. The remainder of the process is identical for the ALMA and UVOIR images. Limits are obtained by introducing articial sources with known fluxes that are recovered using a nding algorithm, which is described in Appendix B.  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 2. The 2014 SINFONI H and K spectra of the central region of SN1987A. Both spectra are extracted from regions that correspond to the 800 km s1 kick region (Section 3.2, Figure 1). The solid black lines are the upper limits and the dashed black lines are the average flux in the selected intervals (Section 3.5.1). The spectra have been corrected for spread light from the ER and background-subtracted(Section 2.3), and corrected for interstellar reddening(Section 3.3). The observed spectra (blue) have been binned by a factor of 21 for visual clarity. The spectra are extracted from regions corresponding to the 800 km s1 kick region and wavelengths are corrected for the systematic heliocentric velocity of SN1987A of 287 km s1 away from Earth(Grningsson et al. 2008a, 2008b). Limits are then constructed from spectral regions that are relatively free of line emission. These regions are assumed to contain contribu tions from weak lines, gas continuum emission, and emission from the compact object. Therefore, the determined limits are conservative limits on the contribution from the compact object. We t functions to the observed flux within the regions that are free of line emission (Sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.2). The magnitudes of these functions are then increased until the 2 values have increased by 7.740. These values are then taken to be the one-sided 3 upper limits. We veried that the reduced 2 values are reasonably close to unity, which is required for this method to be applicable. The upper limits from the SINFONI spectra are set using the flux density in regions that are free of strong line emission. The resulting spectra are shown in Figure 2. The regions are selected to avoid intervals of emission lines identied in SN1987A provided in Tables 3 and 4 of Kjr et al. (2007) and regions of H2 emission(Fransson et al. 2016). Moreover, wavelength intervals close to residual atmospheric lines are also excluded. These are clearly seen in observations as narrow lines. In total, 16% of all data pass the aforementioned selection criteria in the H band; for the K band, 28% pass the criteria. We combine many very narrow intervals into four groups and dene constant functions within the groups (Figure 2). We choose four regions because the specic flux is relatively constant within the regions. The constant values are the averages within each group, which are then increased to a 3 Figure 3. The 2014 STIS spectrum of the central region of SN1987A. The extraction region is a rectangle that approximately contains the 800 km s1 kick region (Section 3.2, Figure 1). The solid black line is the power law that represents the 3 upper limit to continuum emission from a compact object. The dashed black line is the best-t power law, which is a factor of 2.1 lower than the limit. The gray regions indicate the wavelength intervals in which the power law is tted. The spectra have been corrected for spread light from the ER and background-subtracted(Section 2.5), and corrected for interstellar reddening(Section 3.3). The observed spectrum (blue) is smoothed by a factor of 11 for visual clarity. The orange line is a model spectrum of SN1987A taken from Jerkstrand et al. (2011) normalized to H. This model is only used for identifying regions that are free of line emission. 3.5.2. Optical Spectral Limit To determine the compact object observation, a spectrum is extracted from the search region. Because of the resolution of the instrument, the spectrum is from a region with a width of two 100 mas slits and height of ve 50 mas pixels, which is approximately equivalent to a rectangle that just contains the 800 km s1 extraction region (Figure 1). A power law is tted to regions that are free of strong lines (gray regions in Figure 3). The power describes the quasicontinuum well within the STIS wavelength range 530010000, which is why we do not use the same (Section 3.5.1). No signicant is seen for other simple functional forms. The selected regions that are relatively free from line emission are 60256100, 68506950, and 75507650. The average flux in the middle region is slightly higher, but excluding it results in a 10% less constraining limit because of the reduced statistics. The regions are found by visual inspection of the observed spectrum and by searching the model spectrum of Jerkstrand et al. (2011) for regions free of strong lines. The model computes an observed spectrum by simulating the radiation transfer through the SN ejecta, which is assumed to be powered by the radioactive decay of 44Ti. We note that the predicted spectrum was summed over the entire ejecta and worse agreement is expected for the smaller search region. The model is only used to identify line-free regions and it is included in Figure 3 for reference. To determine the X-ray flux limit on the compact object, the ER emission needs to be modeled. This is important because the observed flux in the inner region is dominated by spread light from the ER. We use spread light to refer to the result of  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 best-t ellipse. The outer region is dened as an inclined elliptical annulus with the inner region as the inner boundary. The semimajor axis of the outer boundary of the outer region An ER spectrum is extracted from the outer region and a central spectrum from the inner region, henceforth referred to as the ejecta spectrum. The ejecta spectrum has a total photon count of 624. The option to correct for the encircled energy (EE) of the CIAO task specextract is disabled. Instead, the correction factor for the inner region is computed to be 0.46 using the simulated MARX PSF. The value of 0.46 is computed for a point source at the center and will be used to correct for the missing flux throughout this analysis. No EE correction is applied to the outer region because the physical flux of the ER is not of interest. This method is employed because it allows for tting of the fraction of spread light, which can then be directly compared to the modeled fraction of 3.6.2. Modeled Spread Light Fraction Light from the bright ER contaminates the central region of SN1987A in the Chandra observations. We estimate the fraction of spread light ( fs) using the spatial model and compare it to the observed value, which is obtained by spectral tting. The fraction of spread light is dened as the ratio of spread light flux in the inner region to the flux in the outer spatial model with no central source. The model is forward folded using the PSF to simulate the angular response of the detector and the uncertainties are obtained by simulations using the tted model. We assume that the energy dependence of the EE is relatively weak, implying that the spectrum of the spread light in the inner region is the same as the spectrum of the ER itself. This assumption is partially motivated by the fact that the energy dependence is modest over the range covered by the bulk of the photons. Additionally, the small angular separations Section3.2 of Park et al. (2010) for a more detailed treatment 3.6.3. Observed Spread Light Fraction The observed fraction of spread light can be determined by extracting spectra from both the ER and the inner region, and that describes the ER to the inner spectrum, with only the normalization left free to vary. This needs to be done because there might be a signicant contribution from the compact object in the observation, which is assumed to have a spectrum different from that of the ER. The model we use for the ER spectrum consists of an ISM absorption component and three source components; an ionization equilibrium collisional plasma (vequil) at a temperature of 0.3keV, a constant-temperature plane-parallel shock plasma model (vpshock) at a temperature of 2.1keV, and a power-law component. ISM absorption of all components is modeled using the tbgrain(Wilms et al. 2000) photoabsorption model with a frozen hydrogen column density molecular. These values are taken from Willingale et al. (2013)31 and are approximately a factor of two higher than the value used 31 http://www.swift.ac.uk/analysis/nhtot/ Figure 4. Folded model (left panel; see the text) and the 2015 September 17 Chandra/ACIS observation binned to 502 mas2 pixels in the energy range 0.310keV (right). The ellipse shows the inner region where the ejecta angular blurring of telescopes, also referred to as wings, leaked light, scattered light, or glare. The spatial model allows for computation of the amount of spread light in the inner region. Finally, the limits are set by spectral tting to the spectrum from the inner region with a model that includes the spread We also briefly inspected the 61 ks ACIS observation from 2000 December 7 (Obs. ID 1967) and nd that the X-ray limits allow for approximately a factor of two higher luminosities because of the higher ejecta absorption (Appendix C). It is unlikely that more stringent limits can be placed using the High Resolution Camera on board Chandra because of the very poor energy resolution, which prevents separation of emission from The remnant is tted with an ellipse of sinusoidal intensity along the azimuth and Gaussian radial proles, and is then folded through the modeled instrumental PSF. This is just a model used to describe the observed morphology of the ER. A description of the simulation of the Chandra PSF is provided in Appendix F. The inner region covering the central ejecta is excluded from the t to reduce the effects of any contribution from a central source. Observations show ner structure than allowed by this simple model. Therefore, the pixels of the unfolded model are given some freedom by assigning new values that are distributed as normal distributions, with the mean set to the original value and standard deviation set to one third of the original value. Any negative values are set to zero. The random reassignment of pixels is performed 10,000 times and the folded model that gives the maximum likelihood for the observed data is chosen, as shown in Figure 4. The goodness of t is determined by simulating 100,000 observations from the folded best-t model. A total of 53,039 simulations resulted in a higher statistical likelihood than the real observation, showing An inner and an outer region are dened using the best-t model. These are the regions from which spectra are extracted. The inner region (Figure 4) is dened as an inclined ellipse with parameters given by the tted model: a position angle of 83 to the semimajor axis (dened counter-clockwise from north) and a ratio of semimajor to semiminor axis of 1.37. The magnitude of the semimajor axis of the inner region is set to 450 mas, which is chosen to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of a central point source. This can be compared to the 870 mas semimajor axis and 620 mas semiminor axis of the  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 by many previous X-ray studies of SN1987A, which neglected the molecular component. We note that difference of 3% for our results because of the high ejecta absorption. For this reason, we also ignore any CSM or LMC 2cD = - for 2 additional degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) and clearly improved the t at energies above 5keV. The power law does not have a clear physical interpretation, but the purpose of the model is only to represent the spread light from the ER into the central region. The t statistic for the ER spectrum is We then t the ER model to the ejecta spectrum, with all parameters frozen apart from a constant factor. This represents an upper limit on the spread light from the ER into the central region because it is implicitly assumed that the contribution is negligible. The t statistic is for 27d.o.f. and the fraction of spread light to ER flux is 0.0620.003, which can be compared to the value of predicted by the model. The goodness of t implies that the energy dependence of the EE is small enough to be neglected in this case. The observed value is marginally lower than predicted and implies that practically all flux observed in the central region can be interpreted as spread light from the ER. The purpose of comparing the modeled and observed fs is that an observed value that is signicantly higher than predicted would indicate an additional contribution in the central region. 3.6.4. Calculating X-Ray Limits We construct X-ray limits on the compact object by adding components to the ER spectrum model and re-tting the model to the ejecta spectrum. Then, we nd the limiting value for a parameter of interest of the additional component while tting fs and freezing all other parameters. Leaving additional parameters free is not possible because the low number of counts in the ejecta region is insufcient constrain additional parameters. The additional component represents the contribution from the compact object and the SN ejecta absorption (Appendix C) is only applied to this component using the tbvarabs(Wilms et al. 2000) photo absorption model. The presented results are obtained using the LevenbergMarquardt tting algorithm and the 2 statistic. We also attempted an unbinned analysis using the Cash-statistic (Cash 1979), but found differences that are much smaller than Blackbody and power-law models with different amounts of ejecta absorption are tested, as described in Section 4.4. The for all models with absorption (Section 4.4), which means that degenerate with the additional component. The upper limits are obtained by requiring an increase of the 2 statistic of 7.740. This corresponds to a one-sided 3 limit, analogous to the SINFONI and STIS spectral limits (Section 3.5). We describe our model of the ejecta dust absorption in Section 4.1, which is relevant for the results from the UVOIR the other wavelengths. The direct millimeter, UVOIR, and X-ray limits are then presented in Sections 4.24.4. In Section 4.5, we present the bolometric limits, which are partly dependent on the UVOIR observations. Therefore, we provide bolometric limits for both dust-free and dust-obscured lines of sight. The effects of absorption by ejecta dust are important in UVOIR. The dust is assumed to have a negligible impact on the millimeter observations and have the same absorption proper ties as gas in the X-ray regime(Morrison & McCammon 1983; Draine 2003; Alp et al. 2018). Large amounts of dust have been observed in SN1987A (Lakievi et al. 2011, 2012a; Matsuura et al. 2011, 2015; Indebetouw et al. 2014; Dwek & Arendt 2015; Wesson et al. 2015; Bevan 2018) and there is evidence that the dust resides in clumpy structures (Lucy et al. 1989, 1991; Fassia et al. 2002; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). The latter means that the dust is modeled as a covering factor and not an average optical depth. The diameters of molecules have been observed to be cm, Abelln et al. 2017), but it is possible that the size of the dust clumps is different from the clumps of molecules. The covering factor has been estimated to be 50% 70% by observing asymmetries of emission lines and spectral modeling (Lucy et al. 1989, 1991; Wooden et al. 1993; Wang et al. 1996; Fassia et al. 2002; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). insufcient for detailed corrections. In particular, the 3D SN the X-ray absorption estimate (Appendix C) cannot be used for the dust because dust formation, composition, and geometry depend on additional unconstrained parameters(e.g., Bevan 2018). SN1987A is free of ejecta dust clumps when placing limits in UVOIR. If there is a dust clump along our line of sight to a compact object, then essentially all UVOIR emission from the compact object would be absorbed and the presented direct UVOIR limits would not apply. However, we consider the reprocessing of the absorbed UVOIR emission in the dust-obscured case in Section 4.5, where we obtain bolometric limits based on the energy budget of the ejecta. We assume that indications of energy- or time-dependent attenuation have been observed with VLT/SINFONI (since 2005) or HST (since 1994, Larsson et al. 2013, 2016). 4.2. Millimeter and UVOIR Image Limits SN1987A at millimeter wavelengths using the ALMA images. An image of the observation at 213 GHz is shown in Figure 5 and the limits are provided in Table 2. The ER and central ejecta structure are clearly resolved and no obvious point source is seen in any of the ALMA images. The level of spatially extended emission in the central region is comparable to the noise level. The high noise level is a consequence of constructing images of narrow frequency spans of 12 GHz The upper limits in UVOIR are shown in Figure 6 and listed in Table 3. There are limits in six lters from 2009; F225W, F336W, F438W, F555W, F625W, and F841W. The more constraining limits in the B and R bands are the 2015 observations. The four NIR limits are: WFC3 F110W and F160W from 2011, and NACO H from 2010 and Ks from 2012.  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 The SINFONI H and K spectra from the central region and limits on the compact object are shown in Figures 2 and 6. The limits for the individual wavelength intervals are listed in Table 3. We note that the four intervals are for presentation only and are groups consisting of many narrow ranges, which are used to compute the limits (Section 3.5.1). Images of the selected wavelength intervals that are relatively free of line emission are also studied and no clear point source is seen in the resolved image of the ejecta. The spatial distribution of the emission in the central regions of the ejecta in the continuum images is essentially uniform at the resolution of SINFONI in The STIS spectrum for the central region of SN1987A is Figure 5. ALMA observation at 213 GHz (color map) and the HST/WFC3 observation from 2014 June 15 in the B band (contours). The dotted white circle is the search region (Section 3.2) and the 5740 mas2 beam is shown in the lower right corner. The pixel size is 62 mas2 and the off-source rms noise is Figure 6. Limits in UVOIR on a point source in SN1987A inside a kick region corresponding to 800 km s1. The gray lines are spectral limits. Image limits from left to right are as follows: F225W, F336W, F438W, F555W, F625W, F814W, F110W, F160W, NACO H, and NACO Ks. The less strict limits in F438W and F625W are from 2009 and are simultaneous with the other optical image limits, whereas the stricter F438W and F625W limits are from 2015. Limits from the same epoch are from the same spatial position. The dashed orange line is a blackbody spectrum for the temperature and radius of the Sun scaled to the distance of SN1987A. This can be taken as a limit on a surviving main-sequence companion if our line of sight is free of dust(Section 5.6). The dasheddotted yellow line is the assumed conservative spectrum corresponding to a luminosity of 6.6 Le used for the bolometric limit (Section 4.5). All limits from the same epoch are at the same spatial position. In contrast to the ALMA images, the limits at UVOIR are dominated by the ejecta emission. shown in Figure 3. The limiting power law is given by where F is the spectral flux density and  is the wavelength. is shown in Figures 3 and 6 and is included in Table 3. We note that the limits from spectra are more constraining than image limits at corresponding X-ray limits on the compact object are set using the 2015 September 17 Chandra/ACIS observation and the ejecta absorption estimate from the SN model B15 (Appendix C). We investigate the standard blackbody model, thermal model nsmaxg(Mori & Ho 2007; Ho et al. 2008), and two power laws with photon indices (G) of 1.63, corresponding to the Crab Pulsar, and 2.108, corresponding to the Crab Nebula(Willingale et al. 2001). The nsmaxg model describes thermal emission from an NS for different atmospheric compositions and magnetic eld strengths. We only explore the case of a NS with a carbon atmosphere and a magnetic eld strength of 1012G. A carbon-atmosphere model was reported to t the NS in CasA(Ho & Heinke 2009; Posselt et al. 2013). See Figure 2 of Ho & Heinke (2009) for a comparison of different atmospheric compositions. Apart from the spread light fraction, only the temperature is allowed to vary for the two thermal components and the normalization for the two power laws. The remaining parameters are frozen under the assump tions (discussed in Section 5.3.1) of a gravitational mass of 1.4 Me, local (unredshifted) NS radius of 10km, and uniform emission from the entire surface. The assumed mass and radius give a gravitational redshift factor of 0.766. All X-ray limits are listed in Table 4. The presented effective surface temperatures (T) are given in the local (unredshifted) frame. The parameter (K) is the XSPEC power law normal ization and is given in the observed frame (at innity). The luminosities (L) are also given in the observed frame to facilitate comparisons with other observational studies. The the thermal components are bolometric, whereas the power-law luminosities are given for the observed The limits for the standard blackbody and the =1.63 power law are given for three different levels of SN ejecta absorption. The selected amounts are the average, 10th percentile, and 90th percentile of the optical depth. The general trends for the two thermal components and the two power laws  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 a Start of rst exposure if the observation is multi-day. b Average of the limiting power law. c Extrapolated slightly outside of, and interpolated between, tted intervals. the difference between the 10th and 90th percentiles is a factor of 2 in luminosity for the thermal components and 3 for the power laws. Absorption by the ISM is always included, but we also provide limits for no SN ejecta absorption. This represents the minimum amount of absorption, in case the SN explosion model describes SN1987A poorly and we happen to have a very favorable line of sight. The reason for the extremely high limiting temperatures and luminosities of the thermal models is that the high optical depths at energies below 4keV effectively absorb all emission. We point out that an important factor to the thermal components crossing the detection threshold is the shift of the emission toward higher energies where the optical depth is lower. The power-law models are more constrained in the sense that the limiting luminosity in the 210keV range is much lower because the power-law components extend to higher The bolometric luminosity of the compact object can be constrained by the total energy budget of SN1987A. The energy inputs are radioactive decay of 44Ti and the unknown contribution from the compact object. The energy outputs are far-infrared (FIR) dust emission and UVOIR de-excitation and recombination emission lines. Detailed models of SN1987A predict that much of the emission powered by 44Ti would emerge as ne structure lines in MIR(Jerkstrand et al. 2011), but observations severely constrain these lines (Lundqvist et al. 2001; Bouchet et al. 2006). This implies that the MIR emission is reprocessed and escapes as thermal dust emission in the submillimeter to FIR(Matsuura et al. 2011, 2015; Indebetouw et al. 2014; Dwek & Arendt 2015). The lifetime of 44Ti is =85.0 years (half-life of 58.9 years, Ahmad et al. 2006) and decays into 44Sc, which emits 596-keV their energy locally under the assumption of positrons when promptly decaying to stable 44Ca. All positrons presence of a weak magnetic eld(Ruiz-Lapuente & Spruit 1998) and a fraction fh of the energy goes into heating and the rest goes into excitation and ionization(Kozma & Fransson 1992; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). We assume that the ionization fraction is slightly higher at than at 2875days, which is what was modeled by Jerkstrand et al. (2011). A higher ionization fraction results in a higher heating fraction(Figure 5 of Kozma & Fransson 1992). The emission processes relevant for the compact object are thermal surface emission, accretion, or pulsar wind activity. We the emission is dominated by X-ray emission below 10keV, which is absorbed locally because of the high optical depth(Alp et al. 2018) and escapes as thermal dust emission or UVOIR lines. Both surface emission and accretion would be observed as unresolved point sources. Chevalier & Fransson (1992) investigated the early evolutions of young pulsars and their effect on the surrounding ejecta and found that the bubble expansion velocity is luminosity of 1039 erg s1 above 13.6eV. The current limits on the compact object constrains the luminosity, and consequently the expansion velocity, to be orders of magnitude lower. For expansion velocities less than 100 km s1, it is reasonable to treat a possible pulsar wind nebula (PWN) as a point source. Assuming the compact object to be point-like allows us to separate the cases where the line of sight is free of dust and dust-obscured, and use the point-source image limits in the In the case where our line of sight is free of dust, we assume that 70% of the input from the compact object goes into heating and the remaining 30% escapes as UVOIR emission lines. These fractions are distinct from those for the positron input, but we assume them to be the same(Kozma & Fransson 1992; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). We do not consider further reprocessing  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 a The fraction of spread light from the ER at the limiting values of the parameter of interest (either T or K). This can be compared to the predicted value of d Observed bolometric luminosity for the thermal components. Luminosity in the observed 210keV range for the power laws. (Section 3.6.3). Uncertainties are 1s. of the energy that goes into heating, which most likely escapes as thermal dust emission(Bouchet et al. 2006; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). The compact object is situated in the central regions where the photoabsorption is dominated by iron(Figure 2 of Alp et al. 2018), which implies that the line spectrum of the reprocessed emission from the compact object could be different from that of the 44Ti-powered ejecta. Therefore, we choose a conservative limit on the reprocessed UVOIR emission from the compact object to be 4 the range 10003000, which is an extrapolation of the 3s UV (F225W) HST point-source limit Figure 6). This spectral shape was chosen because it results in the least constraining limit. The wavelength range covers the escape(Figures 35 of Jerkstrand et al. 2011) and longer wavelengths are strongly constrained by the limits (Figure 6 and Table 3). The flux limit corresponds to an allowed UVOIR luminosity of 6.6 Le, which for the assumed heating fraction of 70% results in a bolometric limit of 22 Le. The epoch of this is 2009 December, which is set by the HST UV The situation is different in the case where our line of sight to the compact object is obscured by dust. In this case, the contribution from the compact object contribution to dust heating from 44Ti. Out of the fraction that goes into excitation and ionization, a fraction fd is absorbed by dust. The case is simpler for the electromagnetic input from the compact object, all of which goes into dust heating in the dust-obscured case. This implicitly assumes spherical symmetry and means that the total dust luminosity is expected to be where LTi is the 44Ti positron decay luminosity and L is the contribution from the compact object. A limit on L can now be determined. The values of the other 2015; Matsuura et al. 2015, weighted values from 2010 and 2012, and scaled to 51.2 kpc), L  - Me for 51.2 kpc, Jerkstrand et al. 2011; 0.85(Kozma & Fransson 1992; Jerkstrand et al. 2011), and f 1991; Wooden et al. 1993; Wang et al. 1996; Fassia et al. 2002; Jerkstrand et al. 2011, see also Section 4.1). The values are scaled to 9090days after explosion (2012 January), which is the time of the dedicated Herschel observations of the dust luminosity(Matsuura et al. 2015). The distributions are assumed to be Gaussian and condence intervals are 1 except for the fractions, which are assumed to be uniformly distributed within the intervals. This is clearly a very primitive model but the uncertainty in the Ti mass estimate is the largest source of uncertainty and an improvement in the determination of LTi in the near future is unlikely. Therefore, a more detailed model of the energy budget would not improve the limit on L by much. Following the above reasoning, the estimate of the compact additional contribution from the compact object statistically signicant. The 3 upper limit is L Some simplications have implicitly been made. possible that some fraction of the energy emitted by the compact object escapes the remnant before being reprocessed into observable wavebands, such as, for example, in the MIR (Section 5.7.1, Bouchet et al. 2006; Bouchet & Danziger 2014) or as high-energy gamma-rays (Section 5.7.2). The X-ray emission from the ring provides an additional energy source for the ejecta(Larsson et al. 2011), but this primarily affects the outer H and He envelope (Fransson et al. 2013; Larsson All limits on the compact object in SN1987A presented in Section 4 apply to both NSs and BHs. However, the expected emission characteristics for the two classes of objects are very different. This discussion primarily focuses on NSs because the creation of an NS in SN1987A (Section 1) and NSs power a wider diversity of physical through accretion, which is explored in Section 5.3.2 and more comprehensively in Graves et al. (2005). In contrast, BHs primarily reveal Table 5 summarizes all limits on physical parameters. The combination of all available information favors that  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 7. Limits (triangles) on the compact object in SN1987A, shown together with the spectra of the Crab Nebula (dasheddotted purple line; Bhler & Blandford 2014, and references therein), the Crab Pulsar (dashed red line; Bhler & Blandford 2014, and references therein), and the CCO in Cas A modeled as a NS with a carbon atmosphere (solid brown line; Posselt et al. 2013). The spectra are scaled to the distance of SN1987A. The blue limits are from this work, and the orange and green limits are from the literature. The green limits are super-resolved using deconvolution algorithms and all orange limits are unresolved except for the VLBI observation at 1.7 GHz and the Gemini/T-ReCS observations at 10 m. Model-dependent Constraints on Physical Parameters a Either constrained by direct observations (DO) or by the energy budget (EB). b Which observation is constraining. Herschel observations (Dwek & Arendt 2015; Matsuura et al. 2015) are used for the bolometric limit (Section 4.5). c Ejecta dust along the line of sight: Yes, No, or blank if limit is insensitive to dust. is a dust-obscured thermally emitting NS (Section 5.7). The discussion is organized as follows. We compile literature limits for a comprehensive overview of SN1987A observations across the entire electromagnetic spectrum in Section 5.1 and compare our limits with previous works in Section 5.2. The implications of the limits based on direct observations for thermal surface emission are discussed in Section 5.3.1, accretion is discussed in Section 5.3.2, and pulsar activity is discussed in Section 5.3.3. We relate the bolometric limit to physical parameters in Section 5.4 and extrapolate the limits to other epochs using simple models in Section 5.5. Lastly, we explore constraints on a possible binary main-sequence companion in Section 5.6, remaining possibi lities for the compact object in Section 5.7, and briefly look into future prospects in Section 5.8. Limits on a point source collected from the literature are included to give a complete coverage over electromagnetic spectrum. We only include literature limits at frequencies not covered by this work. Limits covering the same bands as our limits are instead discussed in Section 5.2. An overview of limits at all frequencies is shown in Figure 7. More details on the literature limits are provided in Table 6. We categorize the limits based on the methods employed. Unresolved imaging in this context implies that the ER and ejecta are not spatially resolved. These limits are just the total conservative limits. The unresolved radio limit is dominated by ejecta-ER interactions(Callingham et al. 2016), unresolved IR limits by thermal dust emission(Matsuura et al. 2015;  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Literature Limits on SN1987A H.E.S.S. Collaboration et al. (2015) a The abbreviations and acronyms are as follows: Murchison Wideeld Array (MWA); Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA); Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) using ATCA, Parkes, Mopra, and the NASA DSS 43 antenna at Tidbinbilla; Spectral and Photometric Imaging Receiver (SPIRE) and Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer (PACS) on board Herschel; Multiband Imaging Photometer (MIPS) and Infrared Array Camera (IRAC) on board Spitzer; Thermal Region Camera and Spectrograph (T-ReCS) attached to the Gemini South 8 m Telescope; Imager on board the INTEGRAL Satellite (IBIS) on board INTEGRAL; The Large Area Telescope (LAT) on board Fermi; and the High Energy Stereoscopic System (HESS). b Either unresolved (U), meaning that the flux densities are given for the ER and ejecta combined; super-resolved (S), meaning that images are restored using a deconvolution algorithm; or resolved (R), meaning that the ER and central ejecta structure are spatially resolved. c Flux densities presented as estimates of a point source rather than upper limits are denoted by E. This is left blank for values presented as measured fluxes of the d Limits from other epochs are very similar. e This was reported as potential dust emission. Arendt et al. 2016), unresolved X-ray limits most likely by ejecta-ER interactions(Grebenev et al. 2012), and gamma-ray limits most likely by spread light from the nearby objects N157B and 30DorC(H.E.S.S. Collaboration et al. 2015; Ackermann et al. 2016). Super-resolved implies that images are restored using a deconvolution algorithm, which introduces additional assumptions and is model-dependent in some cases. This is especially unreliable because the compact object is surrounded by bright ejecta(e.g., White 1994). Resolved images clearly distinguish the ER from the central ejecta and are the most robust measurements. The VLT/SINFONI, HST/ STIS, and Chandra/ACIS limits from this work are based on spectra, whereas all other limits are determined using images. The radio limits of Potter et al. (2009) and Zanardo et al. (2013) in Table 6 are referred to as estimates. These are excess sources inside the ER that were interpreted as possible indications of a pulsar. However, inconclusive and we are not able to compare our limits with 5.2. Comparison with Previous Limits Earlier studies have presented limits on the compact object in SN1987A in (sub-)mm, optical, UV, and X-rays. Zanardo et al. (2014) discussed the possibility of a PWN with a flux of 3mJy in the range 102672 GHz. This is not directly comparable to our limits of 0.1mJy at 213247 GHz because our limits apply to point sources and a PWN might be spatially Graves et al. (2005) placed limits in optical and UV using data from HST. The image limits from Graves et al. (2005) are lower than ours by approximately a factor of 2, but the STIS limit presented in this work is any previous limit in the same wavelength range. There are numerous factors that contribute to the differences. Their STIS spectrum is from 1999 December and images are from 2003 November taken by the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), observations are from later epochs, which implies that ejecta have expanded signicantly, the shock interactions with the ER X-ray illumination has increased(Larsson et al. 2011), and our search region needs to be larger. Additionally, slightly different values for the reddening and equivalent widths of the lters are used, as well as a different search algorithm (Appendix B). We veried that the combined effect of all factors explains the differences between our limits and those of Graves et al. (2005). Many authors have presented upper limits on the X-ray from Chandra and XMM-Newton (Burrows et al. 2000; Park et al. 2002, 2004; Shtykovskiy et al. 2005; Haberl et al. 2006; Ng et al. 2009; Orlando et al. 2015; Frank et al. 2016; Esposito et al. 2018). The reported luminosity limits are in the range (0.360 instruments, methods, assumed spectra, and energy ranges (often 210 keV). This should be compared to our limit of erg s1 for the =1.63 power-law model without ejecta absorption (Table 4). However, most of our X-ray limits are approximately an order of magnitude less constraining than previous X-ray limits because we use a more realistic model of the soft X-ray photoabsorption of the SN ejecta based on 3D neutrino-driven SN explosion models(Alp et al. 2018). We also employ a method (Section 3.6) that uses the angular  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 resolution of Chandra/ACIS in conjunction with its spectral limits do not strongly constrain the surface temperature of an NS (Tables 4 and 5). The remainder of this section provides the information needed to draw this conclu sion. We note that more constraining limits are obtained from the bolometric limits (Sections 5.4 and 5.7). To relate the surface temperature of an NS to observed luminosity, it is necessary to adopt a mass and radius. We assume a gravitational mass of 1.4 Me and a local (unred shifted) radius of 10km for an NS in SN1987A. Recent best estimates based on Bayesian analyses of low-mass X-ray binaries(Steiner et al. 2013), nuclear physics and observational constraints on the NS equation of state(Hebeler et al. 2013), and the binary NS merger GW170817(Bauswein et al. 2017) favor radii in the range 1113km; see also Figure 10 of zel & Freire (2016). The primary reason for choosing a radius of 10km is that the limits are more conservative because all reported temperature limits decrease for an increasing NS radius and xed mass. The decrease in limiting temperature for a radius of 12km is approximately a factor of 0.89 for T and 0.94 for T, because of the different dependencies on the gravitational redshift factor. Typical surface temperatures of young NSs are of the order of a few million Kelvin and correspond to spectral peaks at soft X-ray energies of 1keV. The characteristic temperature for a given NS age depends on the relatively unknown cooling properties of NSs(Yakovlev & Pethick 2004). For an NS at 30 years that has not undergone thermal relaxation, a typical Shternin & Yakovlev 2008; Page et al. 2009; Klochkov et al. 2015). A more extreme case is for an NS with a carbon heat blanket. Carbon is more heat transparent and gives T MK, Yakovlev et al. 2011; Klochkov et al. 2015). These values are at the high end of temperatures predicted for an NS in SN1987A. If thermal relaxation has started, the temperature would decrease quickly at current epochs(Gnedin et al. 2001; Yakovlev & Pethick 2004; Shternin & Yakovlev Limits on thermal emission from an NS in SN1987A based on the X-ray observation are provided in Tables 4 and 5. The X-ray limits constrain thermal spectra much more strictly than the UVOIR limits. The limiting temperatures are approximately 8 MK for all expected levels of ejecta absorption and NS atmospheres. This is clearly above the predicted values of the direct observations do not exclude any models. Thus, a scenario where SN1987A created a central compact object(e.g., Posselt et al. 2013; Bogdanov 2014) is consistent with the observational limits. It is possible that the compact object is accreting a signicant amount of matter. An extensive study of many different accretion scenarios was made by Graves et al. (2005, their to which the reader is referred for a comprehensive analysis of accretion in SN1987A. We restrict our discussion of accretion to the simplest model with the purpose of estimating the luminosity, and nd that most predictions for fallback are excluded unless the accretion efciency is less than 0.03 (cf. Section 5.5). The simplest accretion model is to assume that a signicant amount of the gravitational binding energy of the infalling material is converted into radiation. The accretion luminosity where  is the accretion efciency, M is the accretion rate, and c is the speed of light in vacuum. A typical accretion efciency for an NS of mass 1.4 Me and radius 10km, assuming the accreted gas radiatively cools efciently(e.g., McCray 1979). The efciency of accretion onto BHs is more model-dependent. Possible values of BH accretion efciencies range from 1010 for spherically symmetric accretion(Shapiro to 0.4 for disk accretion(Frank et al. 2002). For reference, the Eddington luminosity (LEdd) for an object of erg s1, which corresponds to an Eddington accretion rate (MEdd This relies on some standard assumptions that are inapplicable in this case, but we choose to use the Eddington luminosity as a unit for comparison with other works. The amount of fallback onto NSs after SN explosions has been estimated to 0.1 Me, which mostly accrete on timescales 1 year (Chevalier 1989; Houck & Chevalier 1991; Brown & Weingartner 1994; Chatterjee et al. 2000). Brown & Weingartner (1994) estimated that a mass of 104103 Me remains bound to the NS in SN1987A after 3years. Relevant timescales for accretion of this remaining mass are years, and it is possible that most of the remaining mass is expelled(Houck & Chevalier 1991; Chatterjee et al. 2000). As an example, we assume a relatively conservative fallback mass of 105 Me that is uniformly accreted over 104 yr. This results in an accretion rate of 109 Me yr1, which corresponds The X-ray limits are 0.043.6 10,433 days (2015 September). Given that the spectrum is ) can be taken as a limit on the current accretion rate in SN1987A based on the X-ray observation. This is only consistent with the prediction of 6 . The discrepancy between models and observations is even clearer if the temporal evolution of the accretion rate is 5.3.3. Magnetic Field and Rotation We constrain the surface magnetic eld strength (B) and rotational period (P) of an NS in SN1987A using a simple model of a rotation-powered PWN and assuming spectra in the form of the Crab Nebula and Pulsar. An analog of the Crab Nebula or the Crab Pulsar in SN1987A is ruled out even if our line of sight is dust-obscured (Table 5). luminosity of an NS can be modeled by a rotating magnetic dipole in vacuum(e.g., Equation (10.5.4) of  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Several assumptions have implicitly been made; the rotation axis and the magnetic dipole axis are orthogonal and the dominating source of energy is the rotational energy of the NS. We follow the convention of letting the surface magnetic eld strength be the magnetic equator eld strength and using Manchester et al. 2005). The magnetic eld strength at the magnetic poles is a factor of two higher. We also note that the force-free magnetic dipole formula would imply 1.7 times lower magnetic eld strengths than the vacuum formula for orthogonal rotation and magnetic axes(Spitkovsky 2006). In the simplest picture, the energy emitted by the NS is deposited into the surroundings where it attempt to model the complex interactions that generate the observed spectrum of a PWN. Instead, we assume that the deposited energy emerges with the spectrum of the Crab the Crab Pulsar, and study these two cases separately. The spectrum of the pulsar is the pulsed component, which corresponds to radiation originating predominantly from the immediate surroundings of the pulsar and to a lesser extent from the pulsar itself. The Crab is one of the most extreme sources in the sky and it is not a typical PWN. For a high energy comparison of the pulsed emission, see Figure 28 of Kuiper & Hermsen (2015), and for a multiwavelength comparison of the Crab and PSRB0540-69.3, see Figure 15 of Seramovich et al. (2004). However, the Crab is relatively young, well-observed, and frequently used as a reference. The physical scenario is that an NS created by SN1987A is a pulsar that drives a younger and smaller analog of the Crab in the SN With Equation (4) and a spectral shape, we can compute the region in the BP-plane that is allowed by the upper limits. This is done by taking the Crab Nebula spectrum and the Crab Pulsar spectrum, scaling to the distance of SN1987A, and then scaling the spectra such that they are consistent with the limits (seeFigure 7). If our line of sight is free of dust, both spectra are constrained by the SINFONI data point at 1.7 m, otherwise the nebula spectrum is constrained by the 213 GHz limit and the pulsar spectrum is constrained by the =1.63 X-ray power-law limit. We only use the new limits presented in this work and we assume that a PWN is point-like (Section 4.5, and Chevalier & Fransson 1992). The allowed luminosities vary from 3 Le, corresponding to 8.2 Nebula, to 830 Le, corresponding to 0.42 of the Crab Pulsar (Table 5). The luminosities can be translated to limits in the BP-plane by rearranging Equation (4). The local (unredshifted) radius is taken to be 10km. The limits span a range from included in Table 5 and shown in Figure 8. The limits are all relatively low and any possible PWN activity is most likely Figure 8. Limits on B and P of an NS in SN1987A, together with the pulsars (black points) in the ATNF Pulsar Catalogue(Manchester et al. 2005), which are included for reference and do not represent the expected properties of the compact object in SN1987A. The large white diamond is the Crab Pulsar. The solid line is the limit from direct observations for a Crab Nebula spectrum in the dust-free case and the dotted line is for a Crab Pulsar spectrum obscured by dust. These limits are chosen because they are the two extremes, implying that all other BP-plane limits are covered within the range. The shaded extensions that are partially horizontal correspond to the respective lines but for constraints on birth values of B and P for an assumed temporal evolution (see Section 5.5). The color map represents the current luminosity of a rotating dipole in vacuum as modeled by Equation (4) as a function of birth values of B and P. The bolometric limit on the compact object in SN1987A is 22 Le at 8329 days (2009 December) if our line of sight is free of dust and 138 Le at 9090 days (2012 January) in the dust (Section 4.5) and the direct observations are arguably less model-dependent. The direct-observation limits and the bolo metric limits can be viewed as independent in SN1987A. All constraints on physical parameters are provided in Table 5. Only the bolometric limits on the effective temperature are substantially more constraining than the corresponding direct-observation limits. In the dust-free case, the bolometric limit constrains the NS radius of 10km and mass of 1.4 Me. The corresponding value for the dust-obscured case is T MK). This is much stronger than the constraints based on direct X-ray observations, which are approximately T MK, Table 4). Additionally, the bolometric limit on the effective blackbody temperature is independent of the composition of the atmosphere of the NS. Interestingly, the dust-free limit of 3.8 MK is close to some theoretical predictions (Section 5.3.1). Given that the limit is conservative, it can be taken as an indication that the compact object is obscured by dust if it is an NS. The constraints on the accretion rate and pulsar activity from the bolometric limits were obtained using Equations (3) and(4). The results are within a factor of 3 to those of the direct limits, as summarized in Table 5. 5.5. Implications for Other Epochs In the above discussion, we have focused on constraints on physical properties at the times of observation. Here, we briefly  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 explore extrapolations of the limits to other epochs. In the case of thermal emission from an NS, the surface temperature is expected to be relatively constant from a year after explosion to current epochs(Shternin & Yakovlev 2008), which implies that the current limits apply to earlier times as well. However, if thermal relaxation has occurred, then it is possible that the surface temperature has been higher than our current limits. Accretion and pulsar properties are expected to have modied if extrapolated to other epochs. These extrapolations are uncertain and rely on models of how accretion and pulsar properties evolve over time. For accretion, the basic picture is a period of rapid fallback followed by a declining tail with a time . This dependence can be derived from simple arguments for marginally bound gas(Rees 1988; Evans & Kochanek 1989; Phinney 1989). This means that the limit at one year after explosion. The accretion rate was predicted to be about 104 Me yr1 one year after explosion(Chevalier 1989; Houck & Chevalier 1991). The discrepancy with observations was clear a few years after explosion(e.g., Suntzeff et al. 1992), and is stronger now. A feedback is indicated, which could be the radiation pressure when the radiation can rst escape from the shocked region(Houck & Chevalier 1991). The temporal evolution of a rotating dipole in vacuum where P0 is the birth period, t is the time since birth, and where P is the period derivative and M the NS mass. This models the NS as a homogeneous sphere, and assumes constant magnetic eld and inclination angle. This allows us to translate the current observational limits to constraints on birth proper ties (Figure 8). For all but very high magnetic eld strengths, the limits are essentially the same because the spin-down timescale is long. However, for magnetic eld strengths above G, the current period is practically independent of the For the rotational energy of the NS to contribute a signicant fraction of the explosion energy, the rotational period has to be a few milliseconds. Figure 8 excludes all initial periods shorter than 10ms unless the magnetic eld is unusually weak or unusually strong. If the eld has not evolved and the pulsar formula is applicable, the rotation of the NS is thus unlikely to have contributed a signicant fraction of the explosion energy, which lends some support to the hypothesis that SN1987A was a neutrino-powered event. 5.6. Limits on a Binary Companion The UVOIR limits can also be used to constrain a possible surviving binary companion in SN1987A. The evolution understood and some theories involve binary interaction as an explanation for the three circumstellar rings(Blondin & the progenitor Sanduleak69 202 is still not Lundqvist 1993; Morris & Podsiadlowski 2007, 2009) and the peculiar properties of SN1987A(e.g., Menon & Heger 2017; In Figure 6 we show a blackbody spectrum corresponding to the temperature and radius of the Sun scaled by the distance to SN1987A. It happens to just t below all UVOIR limits and is constrained by the SINFONI data point at 1.7 m. Therefore, the Sun can serve as the limit for a possible main-sequence companion in SN1987A. We note that this limit only applies if our line of sight to a companion is free of dust. We can use the bolometric limit on the compact object of 138 Le to constrain a main-sequence companion even if our line of sight is obscured by dust. The massluminosity (ML) relation for companion masses where Lc is the companion luminosity. By imposing that of this result by comparing to limits from other ML relations. (depending on angular momentum and metallicity) from Figure 5.11 of Salaris & Cassisi (2005). Morris & Podsiadlowski (2009) proposed that a 15 Me primary and a 5 Me companion merged to form Sandu leak69 202. The constraints on a binary companion show that such a companion did not survive as a 5 Me main In this section, we combine all available information and explore the remaining possibilities for the compact object, which results in much stronger conclusions. Even though the limits in individual frequency intervals are relatively weak, only a few possible options remain for the compact object in SN1987A. This is because the direct limits are corrected for absorption, but do not consider reprocessing of the absorbed energy. This is a limitation with important consequences because some of the limits (Table 5) require more than 100 Le to be absorbed and it is not obvious how such large amounts of energy can escape undetected. The bolometric limits address this limitation by including reprocessing of the emission. However, the bolometric limits only consider the cases when the UVOIR emission can escape and when the UVOIR emission is absorbed by dust. This is effectively equivalent to having a minimal 1D spherical geometry and disregarding the bolometric limits rely on additional assumptions and are much information of the observations. We stress that Below, we rst describe in detail the reprocessing of the is expected in all models involving NSs in Section 5.7.1. This is followed by our explanation and reasons for rejecting additional components in 5.7.1. Thermal Surface Emission If the compact object is an NS, then at least thermal surface emission is expected. For a gravitational mass of 1.4 Me and a  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 local radius of 10km, 3.1 MK corresponds to a luminosity at innity (redshifted, observers frame) of 10 Le (Section 5.3.1). The choice of 10km is conservative, as a choice of 12km would increase the luminosity by 60% for a xed temperature (increased emitting area and decreased gravitational redshift). The thermal emission peaks at soft X-ray energies, which is photoabsorbed locally (on-the-spot) due to the high optical depth of the ejecta for soft X-rays(Alp et al. 2018). The X-ray emission that is absorbed by the ejecta is reprocessed into dust continuum emission, and optical and UV emission lines. The fact that the very conservative limit of 22 Le (Section 4.5) is close to the expected luminosity of 10 Le indicates that the compact object is dust-obscured. Regardless of whether or not there are dust clumps directly along the line of sight, it is likely that a signicant amount of the X-ray input would escape as thermal dust emission at (sub-)millimeter and FIR wavelengths. If the reprocessing into dust heating occurs on-the-spot and thermal dust emission escapes directly, an NS would appear as a point source in the dust emission. To fully explore this scenario, we need to analyze observations at frequencies where the dust emission peaks; investigate the dust lifetime close to the NS; model the dust composition, geometry, and temper ature; model the distribution of 44Ti; and compute the radiation propagation of UVOIR photons powered by X-ray emission from an NS. This is beyond the scope of this paper and will be the subject of future studies. likely alternative scenario to on-the-spot dust heating is if the mean free path of UVOIR photons in the ejecta is comparable to the spatial extent of the ejecta. In this case, the emission would diffuse on scales comparable to the size of the ejecta and be spatially mixed with the emission powered by the decay of 44Ti. This is effectively what was assumed for the dust-obscured bolometric limit of 138 Le (Section 4.5) because it did not consider the spatial distribution of the escaping radiation. However, if the UVOIR photons have a long mean the escaping reprocessed UVOIR emission is expected to be directly observed. This means that only a certain range of intermediate mean free paths allows an NS to Future observations that spatially resolve the dust emission will provide information about the mean free path of UVOIR photons. It is unlikely that clumps of 44Ti would appear as point sources if the mean free path is long because observable overdensities require the clumps of 44Ti to be well-obscured by dust. In addition, it is not clear if the intrinsic distribution of 44Ti allows for overdensities that can be confused with an NS (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015). A less likely scenario is that the input from the NS surface emission somehow escapes in the MIR where observational limits are poor, possibly as hot-dust emission(see Bouchet et al. 2004; Bouchet & Danziger 2014). This is unlikely because it requires the primary emission to be reprocessed by dust with a temperature tuned such that the emission escapes detection. Furthermore, we know that the MIR ne structure lines that are predicted to be the primary cooling channels (Jerkstrand et al. 2011) have not been observed(Lundqvist et al. 2001; Bouchet et al. 2006), implying that MIR emission 5.7.2. Favored Explanation and Additional Components All things considered, we nd the most likely scenario to be in SN1987A is a dust-obscured thermally emitting NS. We favor this scenario regardless of whether or not the dust absorbs the UVOIR emission locally or if the mean free path for UVOIR photons is comparable to the The bolometric limit of 138 Le leaves little room for accretion and pulsar wind activity, which would appear as emission of 10 Le (Table 5). The effects vary depending on the spectrum. For accretion, the input is most likely in the form of soft X-rays and can be treated analogously to the thermal surface emission and simply be added to the thermal luminosity Pulsar wind activity is more complicated since it could extend over the entire electromagnetic spectrum. However, the luminosity from millimeter to soft X-rays is limited by the bolometric limits and the spatial extent(Chevalier & Fransson 1992) is constrained to less than 100 km s1 (Section 4.5). The only realistic scenario for a PWN to contribute more than 138 Le would be if the spectrum is heavily gamma-ray dominated (e.g., Vela and Geminga, Danilenko et al. 2011; Abdo et al. 2013; Kuiper & Hermsen 2015). High-energy gamma-rays escape the ejecta and are not expected to be reprocessed into lower frequencies(Alp et al. 2018). The Fermi/LAT limit (Table 6) is not stringent enough to rule out If the compact object is a radio pulsar, it would emit narrow beams of radio emission. The total radio power is for typical radio pulsars(Lorimer & Kramer 2012; Szary et al. 2014). Even if the ejecta are freefree thick at radio wavelengths, the energy input is insufcient to signicantly contribute to the heating of the ejecta. The only realistic avenue to distinguish a thermally emitting NS from a radio pulsar is if the freefree depth is low enough and the radio beams sweep our line of sight, in which case pulsed radio emission would be detected(for recent limits, see Zhang et al. 2018). For completeness, the compact object in SN1987A could be a BH. However, as discussed in Section 1, most studies predict that an NS formed in the explosion. Below, we review the prospects for detecting the compact object in SN1987A with future facilities. The best constraints in the radio will come from the Square Kilometre Array (SKA, Dewdney et al. 2009; Taylor 2013). SKA-low will not be able to resolve the central ejecta from the ER, but it can perform timing observations to search for pulsed emission. Because of the side lobes of 1%, the sensitivity of SKA-mid is limited to 1% of the ER, which will have 2mJy spots at 0.1arcsec resolution at 8 GHz(Zanardo et al. 2013). A point limit of 0.02mJy can therefore be expected, assuming freefree absorption to be negligible. The limit could possibly be improved by an order of magnitude, depending on the uv-coverage and the ability to self-calibrate. As discussed in Section 5.7, the thermal surface emission from an NS could be reprocessed into a point-like source in the thermal ejecta dust emission. The dust emission peaks at 200 m (1500 GHz) and has been observed at resolution by ALMA and Herschel (Indebetouw et al. 2014; Zanardo et al. 2014; Matsuura et al. 2015). Higher-resolution observations may be able to detect a region of NS-heated dust. The James Webb Space Telescope(JWST, Gardner et al. 2006), The Giant Magellan Telescope(GMT, Johns et al. 2012),  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 and The European Extremely Large Telescope(E-ELT, Gilmozzi & Spyromilio 2007) will allow for signicantly deeper searches using both imaging and spectral observations in the IR and optical. However, it remains uncertain if the compact object in SN1987A is bright at IR or optical wavelengths. A point-like source of a few Le is expected from reprocessing of thermal X-ray emission from an NS surface into UVOIR, if not obscured by dust clouds (Section 5.7). The Advanced Telescope for High ENergy Astrophysics (Barcons et al. 2015, 2017; Collon et al. 2015) will be unable to spatially resolve SN1987A and any emission from the compact object will be blended with the ER emission. In emission from the ER will fade, but the central parts will become brighter, primarily driven by interaction with the reverse shock. This means that SN1987A will become brighter in X-rays toward the center where the compact object expected to reside. However, these difculties will be partly counteracted by the decreasing optical depth. The optical depth in the homologous expansion phase scales as is the time elapsed since the explosion. The optical depth at 2keV is expected to reach 3 by 206610(Alp et al. 2018). The error bar accounts for asymmetries of the explosion, but excludes any uncertainty in the explosion model, variance introduced by the compact object being kicked by the explosion, and CSM structure. At higher energies, this will occur much earlier, as is relevant for a PWN. marginal indication that the compact object is obscured 4. The current accretion rate is limited to less than about  Me yr1 for the simplest model of accretion. This excludes most predictions for 1987A(Chevalier 1989; Houck & Chevalier 1991; Suntzeff et al. 1992) and indicates some kind of feedback(Houck & Chevalier 1991). 5. The limits constrain PWN activity to 3830 Le, depend ing on assumptions about dust and spectral shape. The luminosities can be related to the magnetic eld strength and spin period by modeling the NS as a rotating dipole in vacuum. The limits constrain B to be less than G s2. However, because of the rapid spin-down, we cannot exclude birth magnetic eld strengths higher than 1016G. 6. By combining all available information about radiation reprocessing and geometry, the most likely remaining scenario is that the compact object is a dust-obscured thermally emitting NS. In this case, the thermal surface emission from the NS would be reprocessed into thermal dust emission. For realistic assumptions about the dust properties and geometry, only a small parameter space remains open for additional accretion and pulsar-wind dependent. The most promising avenues for detecting reprocessed surface emission from an NS are provided by We have placed upper limits on the compact object SN1987A using observations at millimeter wavelengths from ALMA; NIR from VLT; optical and UV from HST; and X-rays from Chandra. We assume that the compact object would appear as a point source in images and that it only contributes to the continuum component in observed spectra. We also place constraints on the bolometric luminosity of the compact object by investigating the total energy budget of SN1987A. Our main conclusions are as follows: 1. The only model-independent results are the direct flux limits. They are corrected for absorption, but do not include information about the reprocessing of the absorbed constraining limit in the millimeter range of ALMA is 0.11mJy at 213 GHz. The deepest UVOIR limits are from the spectra taken by VLT/SINFONI in the NIR and HST/ STIS in the optical. The allowed luminosity of the compact object in the UVOIR band is approximately 1 Le. The X-ray limits allow luminosities less than but are very sensitive to the assumed spectrum. 2. The total energy budget of SN1987A places a bolometric limit of 22 Le on the compact object if our line of sight is free of dust, or 138 Le if dust-obscured. This is based on assumptions and models of the emission reprocessing, but relies on a minimal 1D spherical model of the geometry. 3. The limits can be used to constrain the effective local (unredshifted) blackbody temperature of an NS. Only the limit of 3.8 MK from the dust-free bolometric limit is close to constraining any theoretical predictions, which typically are in the range 34 MK. This can be taken as a This research was funded by the Knut & Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council. S.E.W. at supported by the NASA Theory Program (NNX14AH34G). At Garching, support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through Excellence Cluster Universe (EXC 153) and Sonderforschungsbereich SFB1258 Neutri nos and Dark Matter in Astro- and Particle Physics, and by the No.341157-COCO2CASA is acknowledged. The research of is supported in part by the Samuel T. and Fern Yanagisawa Regents Professorship. This paper makes use of the following ALMA data: ADS/JAO.ALMA#2013.1.00280. S and ADS/JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00631.S. ALMA is a partnership of ESO (representing its member states), NSF (USA) and NINS (Japan), together with NRC (Canada) and NSC and ASIAA (Taiwan) and KASI (Republic of Korea), in cooperation with the Republic of Chile. The Joint ALMA Observatory is operated by ESO, AUI/NRAO, and NAOJ. The National Radio Astronomy Observatory is a facility of the National Science Foundation operated under cooperative agreement by Associated Universities, Inc. This work is based on observations collected at the European Organisation for Astronomical Research in the Southern Hemisphere under ESO programme 294.D-5033(A). This research has made use of data obtained through the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Online Service, provided by the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. Support for Programs GO-13181, GO-13405, GO-13810, GO-14333, GO-13401, GO-14753, and GO-15256 was provided by NASA through a grant from the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Incorporated, under NASA contract NAS5-26555.  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 9. VLT/FORS2 circular-polarization observation of SN1987A from 2015 February 23. The images show ordinary (o) and extraordinary (e) beams at two quarter-wave retarder plate angles of =45. The circle centered at the position of SN 1987A (=83. 866246, =69. 269722) marks an aperture of 5 pixel (1250 mas) radius within which the flux is measured. Images at other epochs show no signicant variability. STSDAS and PyRAF are products of the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by AURA for NASA. The scientic results reported in this article are based to a signicant degree on data obtained from the Chandra Data Archive. This research has made use of software provided by the Chandra X-ray Center (CXC) in the application package CIAO. This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Data System. Facilities: ALMA, HST (UVIS, STIS), VLT (FORS2, Software:astropy(Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013), CASA(McMullin et al. 2007), CIAO/CALDB(Fruscione et al. 2006), DAOPHOT(Stetson 1987), DrizzlePac(Gonzaga et al. 2012), IRAF/PyRAF, matplotlib(Hunter 2007), MARX(Davis et al. 2012), numpy(Jones et al. 2001; van der Walt et al. 2011), scipy(Jones et al. 2001), STSDAS, Synphot(Bushouse & Simon 1994), XSPEC(Arnaud 1996). Circular Polarimetry of SN1987A All observations were acquired with FORS2 mounted at the Cassegrain focus of the UT1 VLT. The observations were obtained in imaging polarimetric mode (IPOL), through the V_ HIGH FORS2 standard lter ( 123.2nm) and with two different quarter-wave retarder plate angles of =45 per epoch, during four epochs: 2015 February 15, 16, 18, and 23. We obtain four exposures per angle, each of 350 s. On the night of February16, instrument was rotated by 90. In IPOL mode, the image is split by the Wollaston prism into two orthogonal polarized outgoing beams, ordinary (o) and extraordinary (e), and the MOS Slitlets strip mask is inserted to avoid overlapping of the beams. One of the observations is shown in Figure 9. frames are bias-subtracted using the corresponding calibration bias frames. A flat-eld correction is not performed because of the flat-eld effect(Patat & Romaniello 2006; OBrien 2015), the additional polarization caused by the color dependent offset to the nominal retarder plate position, and the effect of the incomplete retardation of the quarter-wave plate(OBrien 2015) gets canceled out when calculating the circular polarization using two angles. For each epoch, we group the science frames according to the quarter-wave retarder plate angle, split the ordinary and extraordinary beams, and create separate science frames, align them, and calculate the median of the four exposures. Finally, we investigate the circular polarization of SN 1987A by performing aperture photometry with a set of different aperture radii, centered at the position of SN 1987A (Figure 9) in ordinary and extraordinary beams using the DAOPHOT.PHOT package, and calculating the circular polarization from the determined fluxes. We ignore the observations of February18, because of variable weather conditions, which makes aperture photometry difcult. We determine the amount of circular polarization by the equation below, as described in OBrien (2015): where f o and f e are the measured fluxes in the ordinary and extraordinary beams, respectively. The error is calculated by propagating the photometry uncertainties. We calculated the circular polarization of SN 1987A from fluxes determined by performing aperture photometry using different aperture radii of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5pixels (250 mas pixel1), centered at the position of SN 1987A. We found that the circular polarization is consistent with zero. Figure 10 shows the circular-polarization, Stokes V values for the different aperture radii. We are unable to determine an upper limit on the circular polarization of the central ejecta because the angular resolution is insufcient for resolving the structure of SN1987A. This leaves the circular polarization from the compact object unconstrained. The Crab was also observed using the same setup but for a shorter duration. We are unable to detect any circular polarization in the Crab Nebula, which possibly implies that the method is relatively insensitive. A possible explanation for this is that the phase-averaged polarization is essentially zero. Searches for point sources in the ejecta are made using the DAOPHOT task daond. The most important input parameter for daond is the local noise level (sigma). For ALMA images, this is set to the off-source noise in the images. We this method gives essentially the same noise amplitudes. The parameter sigma for the UVOIR images is chosen to account for both the sky background and the Poisson noise of the ejecta. We note that both contributions are of comparable magnitude. The sky background is determined by setting a 3 threshold such that essentially no noise peaks pass  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 10. Circular polarization of SN 1987A measured using different aperture radii of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5pixels (250 mas pixel1). The circular polarization is consistent with 0%. while as many real sources as possible are detected. This transition is clearly seen as a break in the detection-threshold relation(Davis 1994). The ejecta Poisson noise is set to the square root of the maximum photon count detector pixels within the search region. The parameter sigma is then computed as the square root of sky background and ejecta noise is added in quadrature. It is veried that the sample deviation of small segments of the central ejecta is comparable to the computed sigma. The effects of super-resolving when drizzling and instrument gain on the Poisson noise properties are accounted for by including a multiplicative correction factor for the geometric mapping and another factor for the gain. Limits are determined by inserting articial PSFs and nding the PSF flux such that it just crosses the 3 threshold of daond. The procedure is then repeated inside the search region at intervals of 12.5 mas, which is chosen to be the half-pixel size of the WFC3 and NACO images. At a few points, the detection threshold is crossed without added articial sources, sources are detected. These are all just slightly above the detection threshold of 3 and are interpreted as structure in the ejecta. The limits in these points are set to the maximum flux of a PSF that is consistent with the observation. None of the threshold crossing events are spatially coincident in several adjacent lters and they are not signicantly increasing the upper limits. X-ray absorption by SN ejecta is explored in detail using 3D neutrino-driven SN explosion models (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015) in an accompanying paper(Alp et al. 2018). One of the main conclusions is that the optical depth of the SN ejecta for X-rays below 10keV is very high at the age of SN1987A. For a discussion of the transport of the absorbed energy, see Section 4.5. Here, we use the absorption estimates based on the B15 explosion model(Woosley et al. 1988) for our X-ray analysis. The B15 model is a single-star model that was evolved to core-collapse in one dimension without mass loss. It explodes as a blue supergiant with a mass of 15.4 Me and is designed to represent SN1987A. From the models, we compute the column number densities (NSN) of H, He, C, O, Ne, Mg, Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Fe using the ), where X is a chemical element. ) is the abundance of X in the ISM from Wilms et al. (2000). a Direction-averaged SN column number density. d The quantity H0.1 is the hydrogen column density scaled by the ratio of the direction-averaged optical depth to the 10th percentile of the optical depth at 2keV, and H0.9 is the 90th analogue. The column densities of other elements are assumed to be scaled by the same fraction(Alp et al. 2018). explosion model. A single estimate cannot be made because of the asymmetries of the SN explosion. Instead, we focus on the direction-averaged column number densities and the hydrogen number densities corresponding to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the optical depth, which are shown in Table 7. The percentiles are used to represent the variance introduced by SN explosion asymmetries. Even though the hydrogen column number density N HSN( high metallicity of the ejecta results in an optical depth of All observations need to be accurately registered for us to use the position determined in Section 3.1, which is needed to dene the search regions for the images and the extraction regions for the spectra. Only ALMA has good enough absolute astrometry. The other observations are aligned with the HST observations using either nearby stars or the ER, as described ALMA has an absolute astrometric accuracy of less than 10 mas. The accuracy is determined by measuring the phase rms and using it to estimate the phase transfer error, which likely results in a quite conservative estimate. Applying a self calibration gain table to a point source and measuring the offset, and considering the accuracy in measuring baselines both yield uncertainty estimates that are smaller than 10 mas. Both NACO images are mapped onto the HST/WFC3 images using the IRAF tasks geomap and geotran. We choose 10 bright stars in the common FOV, using polynomial tting functions, and a general geometry, which consists of shifts, scale factors, a rotation, and a skew. This aligns the images and resizes them to a common pixel size of 252 mas2. The magnication increases the pixel size from the original detector scale of 13.272 mas2, but  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 HST Observations Used for Astrometric Registration of SN1987A measurements because the FWHM of the point-spread function mas. Comparisons of NACO and HST images show that the spatial alignments are better than position of SN1987A, and the rotations and skews have a negligible impact on the region relevant to this work. The SINFONI images are aligned by tting an elliptical band with a Gaussian radial prole to the ER. The center of the ellipse is then matched with the HST image position presented in Section 3.1. The accuracy is better than 20 mas, which is estimated using the diagonal elements of the covariance matrix. Alignment using nearby stars is not possible because the small FOV of SINFONI does not extend much beyond the ER. The hotspots are also poorly resolved and faint in the SINFONI images, which is why an elliptical band is used to t the ER as The position of SN1987A in the STIS observation is determined by mapping onto the HST images. The R.A. is determined with respect to a nearby, isolated reference star that was used for the spacecraft pointing when performing the ve individual slit observations. Spectral lines from the ER are used to match the decl. with the HST images. This is done by tting Gaussians to the north and south 1D proles of the ER in the slits. The position of SN1987A is known relative to the ER from Section 3.1. The ve slits are rst matched individually, allowing the sample variance to serve as an estimate of the statistical uncertainty. The average position of the ve alignments is then used to align all slits. The 1 uncertainty in the nal decl. of all slits is 0.14 pixels or 7.0 mas. The ER in the Chandra observation is modeled by tting an ellipse of sinusoidal intensity along the azimuth and Gaussian radial prole (Section 3.6.1), which is also used for alignment. There are no point sources visible in the Chandra FOV that can be used for alignment. The error in position using this method is 40 mas, which is small compared to the PSF FWHM of 700 mas of Chandra/ACIS. The uncertainty of the position is determined by simulating samples from the model and then applying the same tting method to resample Observations Used for Astrometric Registration of The observations that are used to determine the position of SN1987A are listed in Table 8. The WFC3 observations are reduced as described in Section 2.4. The previous observations are described in Larsson et al. (2011). The Chandra PSF is created using MARX 5.3.2(Davis et al. 2012), which is called from the CIAO task simulate_psf. The PSF is created for the position of SN1987A on the CCD chip, 22 pixels off-axis (approximately the distance between the default aimpoint and optical axis), using an input spectrum extracted from the source region. The quantum efciency of the detector is included by disabling the ideal option. Simulation of the readout streak and pileup are both performed. The extended option is disabled because the PSF is used as a convolution kernel. The PSF is simulated onto a pixel size of 502 mas2 and statistical fluctuations of reduced by making 200 iterations. The default value of 70 mas the parameter AspectBlur, which is the measured uncertainty of the aspect solution, is used because it better matches the observation according to the statistical likelihood. We note that this is smaller than the merely suggested value of 280 mas,32 which is based on a limited number of observa tions(Primini et al. 2011). The source of this additional blurring for at least some observations is currently not fully understood. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0427-5592 Remy Indebetouw https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4663-6827 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0065-2933 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8532-3594 32 http://cxc.harvard.edu/ciao/why/aspectblur.html  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8005-4030 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0729-1632 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7101-9831 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1272-3017 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5847-2612 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3900-7739 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6815-4055 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3352-7437 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3930-2757 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9117-7244 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0570-9951 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3382-9558 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0831-3330 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4413-7733 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3664-8082 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5529-5593 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1546-6615 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1440-9897 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8057-0294 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2742-771X https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1349-6538 Abdo, A. A., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 17 Abelln, F. J., Indebetouw, R., Marcaide, J. M., et al. 2017, ApJL, 842, L24 Ackermann, M., Albert, A., Atwood, W. B., et al. 2016, A&A, 586, A71 Ahmad, I., Greene, J. P., Moore, E. F., et al. 2006, PhRvC, 74, 065803 Alekseev, E. N., Alekseeva, L. N., Volchenko, V. I., & Krivosheina, I. V. Alexeyev, E. N., Alexeyeva, L. N., Krivosheina, I. V., & Volchenko, V. I. Alp, D., Larsson, J., Fransson, C., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864, 174 Arendt, R. G., Dwek, E., Bouchet, P., et al. 2016, AJ, 151, 62 Arnaud, K. A. 1996, in ASP Conf. Ser. 101, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems V, ed. G. H. Jacoby & J. Barnes (San Francisco, CA: Arnett, W. D., Bahcall, J. N., Kirshner, R. P., & Woosley, S. E. 1989, Asaki, Y., Matsushita, S., Kawabe, R., et al. 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9145, 91454K Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, Barcons, X., Barret, D., Decourchelle, A., et al. 2017, AN, 338, 153 Barcons, X., Nandra, K., Barret, D., et al. 2015, JPhCS, 610, 012008 Bauswein, A., Just, O., Janka, H.-T., & Stergioulas, N. 2017, ApJL, 850, L34 Bevan, A. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 4659 Bionta, R. M., Blewitt, G., Bratton, C. B., Casper, D., & Ciocio, A. 1987, Blondin, J. M., & Lundqvist, P. 1993, ApJ, 405, 337 Blum, K., & Kushnir, D. 2016, ApJ, 828, 31 Bogdanov, S. 2014, ApJ, 790, 94 Boggs, S. E., Harrison, F. A., Miyasaka, H., et al. 2015, Sci, 348, 670 Bonnet, H., Abuter, R., Baker, A., et al. 2004, Msngr, 117, 17 Bouchet, P., & Danziger, J. 2014, in IAU Symp. 296, Supernova Environmental Impacts, ed. A. Ray & R. A. McCray (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 9 Bouchet, P., De Buizer, J. M., Suntzeff, N. B., et al. 2004, ApJ, 611, 394 Bouchet, P., Dwek, E., Danziger, J., et al. 2006, ApJ, 650, 212 Bratton, C. B., Casper, D., Ciocio, A., et al. 1988, PhRvD, 37, 3361 Brown, G. E., Bruenn, S. W., & Wheeler, J. C. 1992, ComAp, 16, 153 Brown, G. E., & Weingartner, J. C. 1994, ApJ, 436, 843 Bhler, R., & Blandford, R. 2014, RPPh, 77, 066901 Burrows, A. 1988, ApJ, 334, 891 Burrows, D. N., Michael, E., Hwang, U., et al. 2000, ApJL, 543, L149 Bushouse, H., & Simon, B. 1994, in ASP Conf. Ser. 61, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems III, ed. D. R. Crabtree, R. J. Hanisch, & J. Barnes (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 339 Callingham, J. R., Gaensler, B. M., Zanardo, G., et al. 2016, MNRAS, Canizares, C. R., Davis, J. E., Dewey, D., et al. 2005, PASP, 117, 1144 Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C., & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ, 345, 245 Chatterjee, P., Hernquist, L., & Narayan, R. 2000, ApJ, 534, 373 Chatterjee, S., & Cordes, J. M. 2002, ApJ, 575, 407 Chatterjee, S., & Cordes, J. M. 2004, ApJL, 600, L51 Chevalier, R. A. 1989, ApJ, 346, 847 Chevalier, R. A., & Fransson, C. 1992, ApJ, 395, 540 Chita, S. M., Langer, N., van Marle, A. J., Garca-Segura, G., & Heger, A. Cohen, M., Wheaton, W. A., & Megeath, S. T. 2003, AJ, 126, 1090 Collon, M. J., Vacanti, G., Gnther, R., et al. 2015, Proc. SPIE, 9603, 96030K Cordes, J. M., Romani, R. W., & Lundgren, S. C. 1993, Natur, 362, 133 Danilenko, A. A., Zyuzin, D. A., Shibanov, Y. A., & Zharikov, S. V. 2011, Davies, R. I. 2007, MNRAS, 375, 1099 Davis, J. E., Bautz, M. W., Dewey, D., et al. 2012, Proc. SPIE, 8443, 84431A Davis, L. E. 1994, A Reference Guide to the IRAF/DAOPHOT Package Dewdney, P. E., Hall, P. J., Schilizzi, R. T., & Lazio, T. J. L. W. 2009, IEEEP, Draine, B. T. 2003, ApJ, 598, 1026 Duric, N. 2003, Advanced Astrophysics (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press) Dwek, E., & Arendt, R. G. 2015, ApJ, 810, 75 Eisenhauer, F., Abuter, R., Bickert, K., et al. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4841, 1548 Eker, Z., Soydugan, F., Soydugan, E., et al. 2015, AJ, 149, 131 Ertl, T., Janka, H.-T., Woosley, S. E., Sukhbold, T., & Ugliano, M. 2016, ApJ, Esposito, P., Rea, N., Lazzati, D., et al. 2018, ApJ, 857, 58 Evans, C. R., & Kochanek, C. S. 1989, ApJL, 346, L13 Fassia, A., Meikle, W. P. S., & Spyromilio, J. 2002, MNRAS, 332, 296 Faucher-Gigure, C.-A., & Kaspi, V. M. 2006, ApJ, 643, 332 Fitzpatrick, E. L., & Walborn, N. R. 1990, AJ, 99, 1483 France, K., McCray, R., Penton, S. V., et al. 2011, ApJ, 743, 186 Frank, J., King, A., & Raine, D. J. 2002, Accretion Power in Astrophysics (3rd ed.; Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 398 Frank, K. A., Zhekov, S. A., Park, S., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, 40 Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2002, NewAR, 46, 487 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Migotto, K., et al. 2015, ApJL, 806, L19 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 88 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2016, ApJL, 821, L5 Fruchter, A. S., & Hook, R. N. 2002, PASP, 114, 144 Fruscione, A., McDowell, J. C., Allen, G. E., et al. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6270, Fryer, C. L. 1999, ApJ, 522, 413 Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2016a, A&A, Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016b, A&A, 595, A1 Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M., et al. 2006, SSRv, 123, 485 Garmire, G. P., Bautz, M. W., Ford, P. G., Nousek, J. A., & Ricker, G. R., Jr. Gilmozzi, R., & Spyromilio, J. 2007, Msngr, 127, 11 Gnedin, O. Y., Yakovlev, D. G., & Potekhin, A. Y. 2001, MNRAS, 324, 725 Gonzaga, S., Hack, W., Fruchter, A., & Mack, J. 2012, The DrizzlePac Handbook (Baltimore: STScI operated by AURA for NASA) Gordon, K. D., Clayton, G. C., Misselt, K. A., Landolt, A. U., & Wolff, M. J. Gould, A., & Uza, O. 1998, ApJ, 494, 118 Graves, G. J. M., Challis, P. M., Chevalier, R. A., et al. 2005, ApJ, 629, 944 Grebenev, S. A., Lutovinov, A. A., Tsygankov, S. S., & Winkler, C. 2012, Grningsson, P., Fransson, C., Leibundgut, B., et al. 2008a, A&A, 492, 481 Grningsson, P., Fransson, C., Lundqvist, P., et al. 2008b, A&A, 479, 761 Haberl, F., Geppert, U., Aschenbach, B., & Hasinger, G. 2006, A&A, 460, 811 Hebeler, K., Lattimer, J. M., Pethick, C. J., & Schwenk, A. 2013, ApJ, 773, 11 Helder, E. A., Broos, P. S., Dewey, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 764, 11 H.E.S.S. Collaboration, Abramowski, A., Aharonian, F., et al. 2015, Sci, Hirata, K., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., Nakahata, M., & Oyama, Y. 1987, PhRvL, Hirata, K. S., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., et al. 1988, PhRvD, 38, 448 Ho, W. C. G., & Heinke, C. O. 2009, Natur, 462, 71 Ho, W. C. G., Potekhin, A. Y., & Chabrier, G. 2008, ApJS, 178, 102 Hobbs, G., Lorimer, D. R., Lyne, A. G., & Kramer, M. 2005, MNRAS, Houck, J. C., & Chevalier, R. A. 1991, ApJ, 376, 234 Hunter, J. D. 2007, CSE, 9, 90 Indebetouw, R., Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., et al. 2014, ApJL, 782, L2 Jerkstrand, A., Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2011, A&A, 530, A45  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:174 (24pp), 2018 September 10 Jerkstrand, A., Timmes, F. X., Magkotsios, G., et al. 2015, ApJ, 807, 110 Johns, M., McCarthy, P., Raybould, K., et al. 2012, Proc. SPIE, 8444, 84441H Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy: Open Source Scientic Tools for Python, https://www.scipy.org/ Kallivayalil, N., van der Marel, R. P., Besla, G., Anderson, J., & Alcock, C. Kirshner, R. P., Sonneborn, G., Crenshaw, D. M., & Nassiopoulos, G. E. 1987, Kjr, K., Leibundgut, B., Fransson, C., et al. 2007, A&A, 471, 617 Kjr, K., Leibundgut, B., Fransson, C., Jerkstrand, A., & Spyromilio, J. 2010, Klochkov, D., Suleimanov, V., Phlhofer, G., et al. 2015, A&A, 573, A53 Kochanek, C. S. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 1633 Kozma, C., & Fransson, C. 1992, ApJ, 390, 602 Kuiper, L., & Hermsen, W. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 3827 Lakievi, M., van Loon, J. T., Patat, F., Staveley-Smith, L., & Zanardo, G. Lakievi, M., van Loon, J. T., Stanke, T., De Breuck, C., & Patat, F. 2012a, Lakievi, M., Zanardo, G., van Loon, J. T., et al. 2012b, A&A, 541, L2 Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Kjaer, K., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 89 Larsson, J., Fransson, C., stlin, G., et al. 2011, Natur, 474, 484 Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 147 Lawrence, S. S., Sugerman, B. E., Bouchet, P., et al. 2000, ApJL, 537, L123 Lenzen, R., Hartung, M., Brandner, W., et al. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4841, 944 Lorimer, D. R., & Kramer, M. 2012, Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press) Lucy, L. B., Danziger, I. J., Gouiffes, C., & Bouchet, P. 1989, in IAU Coll. 120: Structure and Dynamics of the Interstellar Medium, Vol. 350, ed. G. Tenorio-Tagle, M. Moles, & J. Melnick (Berlin: Springer), 164 Lucy, L. B., Danziger, I. J., Gouiffes, C., & Bouchet, P. 1991, in Supernovae, ed. S. E. Woosley (New York: Springer), 82 Lundqvist, P., Kozma, C., Sollerman, J., & Fransson, C. 2001, A&A, 374, 629 Manchester, R. N., Hobbs, G. B., Teoh, A., & Hobbs, M. 2005, AJ, 129, 1993 Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Barlow, M. J., et al. 2015, ApJ, 800, 50 Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Meixner, M., et al. 2011, Sci, 333, 1258 Matsuura, M., Indebetouw, R., Woosley, S., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3347 McCray, R. 1979, in Active Galactic Nuclei, ed. C. Hazard & S. Mitton (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 227 McCray, R. 1993, ARA&A, 31, 175 McCray, R., & Fransson, C. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 19 McMullin, J. P., Waters, B., Schiebel, D., Young, W., & Golap, K. 2007, in ASP Conf. Ser. 376, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XVI, ed. R. A. Shaw, F. Hill, & D. J. Bell (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 127 Menon, A., & Heger, A. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 4649 Michael, E., McCray, R., Chevalier, R., et al. 2003, ApJ, 593, 809 Mitchell, R. C., Baron, E., Branch, D., et al. 2002, ApJ, 574, 293 Modigliani, A., Hummel, W., Abuter, R., et al. 2007, arXiv:astro-ph/0701297 Mori, K., & Ho, W. C. G. 2007, MNRAS, 377, 905 Morris, T., & Podsiadlowski, P. 2007, Sci, 315, 1103 Morris, T., & Podsiadlowski, P. 2009, MNRAS, 399, 515 Morrison, R., & McCammon, D. 1983, ApJ, 270, 119 Ng, C.-Y., Gaensler, B. M., Murray, S. S., et al. 2009, ApJL, 706, L100 Ng, C.-Y., Gaensler, B. M., Staveley-Smith, L., et al. 2008, ApJ, 684, 481 Ng, C.-Y., Potter, T. M., Staveley-Smith, L., et al. 2011, ApJL, 728, L15 Ng, C.-Y., Zanardo, G., Potter, T. M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 131 OBrien, K. 2015, User Manual, issue 96.0, VLT-MAN-ESO-13100-1543 (European Southern Observatory) ODell, S. L., Swartz, D. A., Tice, N. W., et al. 2013, Proc. SPIE, 8859, Orlando, S., Miceli, M., Pumo, M. L., & Bocchino, F. 2015, ApJ, 810, 168 zel, F., & Freire, P. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 401 Page, D., Lattimer, J. M., Prakash, M., & Steiner, A. W. 2009, ApJ, Panagia, N. 1999, in IAU Symp. 190, New Views of the Magellanic Clouds, ed. Y.-H. Chu et al. (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 549 Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Macchetto, F., Adorf, H.-M., & Kirshner, R. P. Park, S., Burrows, D. N., Garmire, G. P., et al. 2002, ApJ, 567, 314 Park, S., Hughes, J. P., Slane, P. O., Mori, K., & Burrows, D. N. 2010, ApJ, Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., et al. 2011, ApJL, 733, L35 Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., Garmire, G. P., & McCray, R. 2004, Patat, F., & Romaniello, M. 2006, PASP, 118, 146 Perego, A., Hempel, M., Frhlich, C., et al. 2015, ApJ, 806, 275 Phinney, E. S. 1989, in IAU Symp. 136, The Center of the Galaxy, ed. M. Morris (Dordrecht: Springer), 543 Posselt, B., Pavlov, G. G., Suleimanov, V., & Kargaltsev, O. 2013, ApJ, Potter, T. M., Staveley-Smith, L., Ng, C.-Y., et al. 2009, ApJ, 705, 261 Primini, F. A., Houck, J. C., Davis, J. E., et al. 2011, ApJS, 194, 37 Rees, M. J. 1988, Natur, 333, 523 Reynolds, J. E., Jauncey, D. L., Staveley-Smith, L., et al. 1995, A&A, 304, 116 Rousset, G., Lacombe, F., Puget, P., et al. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4839, 140 Ruiz-Lapuente, P., & Spruit, H. C. 1998, ApJ, 500, 360 Salaris, M., & Cassisi, S. 2005, Evolution of Stars and Stellar Populations Sanduleak, N. 1970, CoTol, 89 Schreiber, J., Thatte, N., Eisenhauer, F., et al. 2004, in ASP Conf. Ser. 314, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) XIII, ed. F. Ochsenbein, M. G. Allen, & D. Egret (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 380 Scuderi, S., Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Challis, P. M., & Kirshner, R. P. 1996, Seramovich, N. I., Shibanov, Y. A., Lundqvist, P., & Sollerman, J. 2004, Shapiro, S. L. 1973, ApJ, 180, 531 Shapiro, S. L., & Teukolsky, S. A. 1983, Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars: The Physics of Compact Objects (New York: Wiley Shternin, P. S., & Yakovlev, D. G. 2008, AstL, 34, 675 Shtykovskiy, P. E., Lutovinov, A. A., Gilfanov, M. R., & Sunyaev, R. A. 2005, Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163 Smartt, S. J., Eldridge, J. J., Crockett, R. M., & Maund, J. R. 2009, MNRAS, Spitkovsky, A. 2006, ApJL, 648, L51 Steiner, A. W., Lattimer, J. M., & Brown, E. F. 2013, ApJL, 765, L5 Stetson, P. B. 1987, PASP, 99, 191 Sukhbold, T., Ertl, T., Woosley, S. E., Brown, J. M., & Janka, H.-T. 2016, ApJ, Suntzeff, N. B., Phillips, M. M., Elias, J. H., Walker, A. R., & Depoy, D. L. Szary, A., Zhang, B., Melikidze, G. I., Gil, J., & Xu, R.-X. 2014, ApJ, 784, 59 Taylor, A. R. 2013, in IAU Symp. 291, Neutron Stars and Pulsars: Challenges and Opportunities after 80 years, ed. J. van Leeuwen (Cambridge: Tziamtzis, A., Lundqvist, P., Grningsson, P., & Nasoudi-Shoar, S. 2011, Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2015, A&A, van der Marel, R. P., & Kallivayalil, N. 2014, ApJ, 781, 121 van der Marel, R. P., & Sahlmann, J. 2016, ApJL, 832, L23 van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CSE, 13, 22 Walborn, N. R., Lasker, B. M., Laidler, V. G., & Chu, Y.-H. 1987, ApJL, Walborn, N. R., Phillips, M. M., Walker, A. R., & Elias, J. H. 1993, PASP, Walker, A. R., & Suntzeff, N. B. 1990, PASP, 102, 131 Wang, L., Wheeler, J. C., Kirshner, R. P., et al. 1996, ApJ, 466, 998 Wesson, R., Barlow, M. J., Matsuura, M., & Ercolano, B. 2015, MNRAS, West, R. M., Lauberts, A., Schuster, H.-E., & Jorgensen, H. E. 1987, A&A, White, G. L., & Malin, D. F. 1987, Natur, 327, 36 White, R. L. 1994, in The Restoration of HST Images and SpectraII, ed. R. J. Hanisch & R. L. White (Baltimore, MD: STScI), 104 Willingale, R., Aschenbach, B., Grifths, R. G., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, Willingale, R., Starling, R. L. C., Beardmore, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., & OBrien, P. T. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 394 Wilms, J., Allen, A., & McCray, R. 2000, ApJ, 542, 914 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2013, A&A, 552, A126 Wongwathanarat, A., Mller, E., & Janka, H.-T. 2015, A&A, 577, A48 Wooden, D. H., Rank, D. M., Bregman, J. D., et al. 1993, ApJS, 88, 477 Woosley, S. E., Pinto, P. A., & Ensman, L. 1988, ApJ, 324, 466 Yakovlev, D. G., Ho, W. C. G., Shternin, P. S., Heinke, C. O., & Potekhin, A. Y. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 1977 Yakovlev, D. G., & Pethick, C. J. 2004, ARA&A, 42, 169 Zanardo, G., Staveley-Smith, L., Indebetouw, R., et al. 2014, ApJ, 796, 82 Zanardo, G., Staveley-Smith, L., Ng, C.-Y., et al. 2013, ApJ, 767, 98 Zhang, S.-B., Dai, S., Hobbs, G., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1836 The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10  2018. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aad737 X-Ray Absorption in Young Core-collapse Supernova Remnants , Michael Gabler3, Annop Wongwathanarat3 1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden; dalp@kth.se 2 Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 3 Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany Received 2018 May 4; revised 2018 June 18; accepted 2018 June 18; published 2018 September 13 The material expelled by core-collapse supernova (SN) explosions absorbs X-rays from the central regions. We use SN models based on three-dimensional neutrino-driven explosions to estimate optical depths to the center of the explosion, compare different progenitor models, and investigate the effects of explosion asymmetries. The optical depths below 2keV for progenitors with a remaining hydrogen envelope are expected to be high during the rst 2 E2, where t4 is the time since century after the explosion due to photoabsorption. A typical optical depth is 100 t4 the explosion in units of 10,000 days (27 years) and E is the energy in units of keV. Compton scattering dominates above 50keV, but the scattering depth is lower and reaches unity at 1000 days at 1MeV. The optical depths are approximately an order of magnitude lower for hydrogen-stripped progenitors. The metallicity of the SN ejecta is much higher than that in the interstellar medium, which enhances photoabsorption and makes absorption edges stronger. These results are applicable to young SN remnants in general, but we explore the effects on observations of SN1987A and the compact object in CasA in detail. For SN1987A, the absorption is high and the X-ray upper limits of 100L on a compact object are approximately an order of magnitude less constraining than previous estimates using other absorption models. The details are presented in an accompanying paper. For the central compact object in CasA, we nd no signicant effects of our more detailed absorption model on the inferred surface temperature. Key words: stars: neutron  supernova remnants  supernovae: general  supernovae: individual (SN 1987A, Cas A)  Core-collapse supernova (SN, core-collapse unless otherwise stated) explosions expel large amounts of material into their surroundings. The ejecta dominate the absorption for X-rays up to the young SN remnant (SNR) stage. To accurately analyze X-ray observations, it is important to estimate the optical depth as a function of energy along the line of sight. Most X-ray absorption models(e.g., Wilms et al. 2000; Gatuzz et al. 2015) have been developed in order to account for photoabsorption by the interstellar medium (ISM) and the column densities are often obtained by retrieving the hydrogen column number density NISM(H) from H I surveys(Dickey & Lockman 1990; Kalberla et al. 2005; Winkel et al. 2016; HI4PI Collaboration et al. 2016). We use the notation NISM(H) instead of the standard NH to differentiate NISM(H) from NSN(H), which is the hydrogen column number density of the ejecta. Other methods include letting NISM(H) be a free parameter that is tted or ) from observations of dust or molecular lines. It is very common to assume that the abundances of all other elements, relative to hydrogen, are solar or representative ISM abundances(e.g., Anders & Grevesse 1989; Grevesse & Sauval 1998; Wilms et al. 2000). The main difference in young the metallicity is much higher than that Here, we use three-dimensional (3D) neutrino-driven SN explosion models to estimate the column densities of all elements that have a signicant contribution to the optical depth. Similar estimates have been made by other studies using individual progenitors and less realistic SN models (Fransson & Chevalier 1987; Seramovich et al. 2004; Orlando et al. 2015; Esposito et al. 2018). Our results are generally in agreement with previous works, but we explore 3D SN explosion models, quantify the uncertainties introduced by SN asymmetries, and compare different progenitors. The need for more general and detailed ejecta absorption models has been indicated in the literature (e.g., Stage et al. 2004; Shtykovskiy et al. 2005; Long et al. 2012; Posselt et al. 2013; Orlando et al. 2015). We focus on the absorption toward the center of the SN, where the compact is expected to reside, and also re-analyze X-ray observations of the compact objects in SN1987A and CasA SN1987A is the closest observed SN in more than three centuries (for reviews of SN 1987A, see Arnett et al. 1989; McCray 1993; McCray & Fransson 2016). It is located in the Large Magellanic Cloud at a distance of approximately 50kpc(Panagia et al. 1991; Panagia 1999). SN1987A was a TypeII-pec core-collapse SN and is therefore expected to leave a compact object. The observed neutrino burst conrms the existence of a compact object (Bionta et al. 1987; Hirata et al. 1987, 1988; Bratton et al. 1988), but electromagnetic radiation from the compact object has never been observed despite more than 30 years of searches spanning the entire observable spectrum. The X-ray absorption below a few keV in SN1987A is very high at current epochs, which limits our ability to probe accompanying paper(Alp et al. 2018) uses estimates from the current work to model the X-ray absorption and presents a detailed study of multiwavelength flux limits on the compact object. The main result of the X-ray analysis is that the limits are about 100L, depending on the assumed spectrum of the compact object. This is approximately an order of magnitude less constraining than previously published X-ray limits. The difference, compared to previous absorption models, substantial increase of the column densities, particularly for the  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 a Notation of Wongwathanarat et al. (2015). The rst letter does not correspond to any physical quantity (related to creators). The two-digit number approximately the zero-age mass in M. The single-digit number indicates the model number in the series of models with varying explosion energies and initial seed perturbations(Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). The last two letters are pw for power-law wind or cw for constant-wind boundary. b At the time of the explosion. metals, which dominate the opacity in the relevant 0.310keV CasA is a SNR at a distance of 3.4 0.1 motion and age data(Reed et al. 1995). CasA was created by a TypeIIb core-collapse SN(Krause et al. 2008; Rest et al. 2011). Extrapolation of the proper motion of the expanding ejecta estimates the explosion date of the SN to be around the year 1670(Fesen et al. 2006). The SN was possibly observed by John Flamsteed on 1680 August 16(Flamsteed 1725; Ashworth 1980; Hughes 1980; Kamper 1980). The central compact object (CCO) created by the SN was detected in the rst light images of Chandra (Tananbaum 1999; Pavlov et al. 2000; Chakrabarty et al. 2001). The spectrum of the CCO has been interpreted as thermal emission from a neutron star (NS) surface with a carbon atmosphere(Ho & Heinke 2009). Fast cooling of the CCO has been reported based on analyses of Chandra X-ray observation s(Heinke & Ho 2010; Elshamouty et al. 2013), but signicance of the cooling has been discussed by Posselt et al. (2013). Here, we simply repeat part of their analyses and explore the difference introduced by using a more realistic absorption model based on our 3D SN explosion models. This paper is organized as follows. We introduce the 3D SN explosion models in Section 2 and describe the methods in Section 3. The estimated optical depths and abundances are presented in Section 4 and the implications and uncertainties of the results are discussed in Section 5. We provide a summary and the main conclusions in Section 6. An investigation of the effects of ejecta absorption on the interpretation of the observed CasA CCO spectrum is provided in Appendix A. SN explosion models(Wongwathanarat et al. 2015, and references therein) are used in order to estimate the X-ray absorption in SNRs. Details regarding the models are listed in Table 1 and ejecta compositions are listed in Table 2. We choose the B15 and N20 blue supergiant because they are designed to match the progenitor properties of SN1987A. Observations of SN1987A show that the progeni tor was a BSG(Kirshner et al. 1987; Walborn et al. 1987; West et al. 1987; White & Malin 1987). The B15 model is used for the analysis of the X-ray limits on the SN1987A compact object(Alp et al. 2018) because it is the single-star progenitor that yields the best agreement of light-curve calculations based on self-consistent 3D explosion models, compared to observa tions of SN1987A(Utrobin et al. 2015; V. P. Utrobin 2018, in The L15 and W15 models are included in the analysis for the purpose of extending the results to a case considering an explosion of a red supergiant (RSG), and comparing these results to the BSG cases, which should be of interest for the X-ray analyses of more distant SNe. Finally, the IIb model is an explosion of a bare helium core of a RSG. The model shows similarities between the ejecta asymmetries and those deduced from observations of CasA(Wongwathanarat et al. 2017), and thus is used for our CasA CCO analysis. We will refer to B15, N20, L15, and W15 as the non-stripped models. All progenitor models are based on one-dimensional (1D) evolution of non-rotating single stars. The B15 model represents SN 1987A and was evolved without mass loss by Woosley et al. (1988). The N20 model was articially constructed by combining the core(Nomoto & Hashimoto 1988) and envelope(Saio et al. 1988) of two different stars. The combination was made by Shigeyama & Nomoto (1990) and designed to match the properties of the progenitor of SN 1987A. The L15 model was computed without mass loss by Limongi et al. (2000) and the W15 model is the s15s7b2 model of Woosley & Weaver (1995). The IIb model is created by removing all but 0.5M of the hydrogen envelope of the W15 model to avoid the dynamical consequences of the hydrogen shell and to allow the star to explode as a TypeIIb SN, which was the type of the CasA SN(Krause et al. 2008; Rest et al. 2011). The short time between the start of core-collapse to 10 ms after bounce was treated by dedicated simulations. The B15 model was collapsed using a Lagrangian hydro-code by Bruenn (1993) and the N20, L15, and W15 models were collapsed using the PROMETHEUS-VERTEX code(Rampp & Janka 2002) in one dimension(Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). The simulations then were continued (Wongwathanarat et al. 2010b, 2013) from 10ms after core bounce, past the shock revival at 250 ms, and extended to about 1s after shock revival in three dimensions. These 3D simulations were performed using the PROMETHEUS code(Fryxell et al. 1991; Mller et al. 1991) with suitable tuned neutrino heating at the inner boundary. When mapping from 1D to 3D, perturbations with an amplitude of 0.1 % were introduced by hand(Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). The 3D simulations were run on axis-free YinYang grids(Kageyama & Sato 2004; Wongwathanarat et al. 2010a) with an angular resolution of 2. Because of computational innermost regions corresponding to radial velocities of less than 10kms1 were removed from the simulation (Scheck et al. 2006; Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). We let intermediate times refer to the time between the end of early stages at 1 s and the beginning of late times at 105 s (1 day), which was followed by Wongwathanarat et al. (2015). The ve models were mapped onto a larger YinYang grid with the same angular resolution of 2 and a relative radial resolution higher than 1% at all radii. The inner boundary was initially set to 500km and was continuously moved outward to  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 relax time step constraints imposed by the material at small radii with high sound speed. The outer boundary was moved so that the ejecta remain within the grid and was set to 109km by Shortly before the shocks break out from the progenitors (t  104 s), we continue the 3D simulations with a new version of the PROMETHEUS-HOTB code that includes a description of decay. The grid remains unchanged compared to the intermediate evolution. However, in this part of the simulation, we employ a radially outward moving grid, which reduces the numerical diffusion between neighboring grid cells due to the lower relative velocities of the radially expanding ejecta. We continue the simulations until 150 days for the non-stripped models and 18 days for the IIb model. At later times, we do not expect signicant effects of the -decay on the structures, because the ejecta become transparent radiation and because most of the radioactive material has already decayed(for details, see M. Gabler et al. 2018, in All models possess strong asymmetries that are created as a result of non-radial hydrodynamic instabilities behind the stalled shock, where neutrinos deposit supernova explosion during the rst seconds after core bounce(Wongwathanarat et al. 2015). This innermost region is dominated by iron-peak elements and form fast-rising plumes, which are initially rather similar for all models. In decelerated in all models except for the N20 case, which results in considerably more compressed structures in the N20 model. More pronounced differences between the models develop at the interface between the carbonoxygen core and the helium layer, where RayleighTaylor instabilities after the passage of the shock change the morphology of the expanding ejecta. Considerable evolution of the morphology also occurs after the shock has decelerated in the hydrogen envelope. A strong reverse shock is launched upstream into the expanding inner ejecta, which decelerates and compresses the ejecta. The IIb model evolves very similarly to the W15 model, except no reverse shock is formed at the heliumhydrogen interface. This results in stronger and larger-scale asymmetries, higher overall ejecta velocities, and a sharper inner radius of the ejecta (because of the absence of an extended low-velocity tail of the radial distribution) in the IIb model. During the time covered until the nal stage of our simulations, the -decay inflates the radioactive iron-peak ngers signicantly. A comparison of the asymmetries at 2s and tlate between all considered models is provided in Figure 1. The plots also visualize the outcome of different mixing and fragmentation histories of the initial structures as a consequence of differences in the evolutionary Additionally, it has been shown that different asymmetries develop even if the initial conditions are nearly identical for the same progenitor because of the chaotic nature of hydrodynamic instabilities(Wongwathanarat et al. 2015). Mller et al. (2017) demonstrated by 3D simulations that pre-collapse large-scale convective perturbations in the oxygen shell during the late stages of stellar evolution can have a supportive influence on the explosion. These seed perturbations are important because they help the development of violent hydrodynamic mass motions behind the supernova shock, which facilitate the outward expansion of the supernova shock and of the neutrino-heated matter in its wake. More details on the evolution of asymmetries can be found in Section5 of Wongwathanarat et al. (2015) for the early to intermediate phases, in M.Gabler et al.(2018, in preparation) for the late phases of the non-stripped models, and in Section3.3 of Wongwathanarat et al. (2017) for late stages of the IIb model, which exemplies the consequences of removing the hydrogen There were minor differences in the treatment of nucleosynthesis in the different models. Starting from after core bounce at 10 ms, the nucleosynthesis in the BSG models was followed by a network of elements that includes protons; products; and a tracer nucleus X (Kifonidis et al. 2003; Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015). The tracer comprises neutron-rich, iron-group elements and was produced in grid cells where the electron fraction was below 0.49. The radioactive products that were included were 44Ca and 44Sc from b+ decay of 44Ti, and 56Fe and 56Co from b+ decay of 56Ni. The RSG and IIb models follow fewer nuclear species,  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 1. Equal-area Hammer projections of the column mass densities at 2s (left) and at tlate (right). The colors are normalized to the minimum column density for each model. The bottom-left projection is labeled W15 because the IIb model is created from the W15 model. Larger structures are present at early times and during the evolution the large-scale structures fragment into smaller laments and ngers. We note that the contrast between different directions is much larger for the IIb omitting 32S, 36Ar, 48Cr, and 52Fe in the burning network. Free neutrons are followed in all simulations but are irrelevant to our study of photoabsorption and Compton scattering. The models consist of 3D maps of number densities of each element, dened from an inner radius to an outer radius. The vast majority of the mass of the SN ejecta is inside the spherical shell dened by the simulation grid. We refer to this mass as the ejecta mass Mej. The outer radius is set such that essentially all of the ejecta are contained within the grid. The dynamics of the material inside of the inner boundary are not followed in the 3D explosion simulations. This material includes the NS with a baryonic mass MNS and its surrounding material. The mass that is excluded from the simulation within the inner radius has velocities below escape velocity at the end of our simulations and is likely to fall back to the NS on a longer timescale. It is therefore added to the mass of the compact remnant. Typical The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 masses are 0.01M for the non-stripped models and less than 0.15M for the IIb model. We veried that any realistic contribution from the mass inside the inner cutoff has a negligible impact on the results even if the material escaped. The data are mapped from the YinYang grids used for the 3D explosion simulations to spherical coordinate systems for the current work. We denote the conventional radial coordinate r but dene f as the longitude ranging from 0 to 2 and q as the better than 1% at all radii except within radii corresponding to kms1, where the resolution is better than 10 %. The angular resolution of 2 is uniform in f and . These spherical grids resolve the models well enough for accurate estimates of the optical depth while not over-resolving the Yin Yang grids used for the 3D explosion simulations. We denote a unit vector starting from the origin n which will henceforth be referred to as direction. Contributions from different directions are weighted by cos q throughout the analysis to compensate for the varying angular resolution of the spherical coordinate system. The expansions of all models are assumed to be homologous after tlate and all presented values are scaled to 10,000days (27 years). The column number density as nNSN() is computed by integrating the column number density along all directions of the model specied by the angular coordinates f and . The integration is carried out separately for each chemical element. The optical depth  can then where E is the photon energy, the summation index i represents all chemical elements, SNs is the photoabsorption cross section, and Cs is the Compton scattering cross section. The photo absorption cross sections below 10keV are taken from the tables of Gatuzz et al. (2015).4 They compile cross sections obtained using different analytic methods(Bethe & Salpeter 1957), the R-matrix method (Gorczyca 2000; Garca et al. 2005, 2009; Juett et al. 2006; Witthoeft et al. 2009, 2011; Gorczyca et al. 2013; Hasolu et al. 2014), semi-empirical ts(Verner & Yakovlev 1995), and experimental values (Kortright & Kim 2000). The tables cover energies from 0.01 to 10keV with 650,000 logarithmically spaced steps, which results in a relative energy resolution of 105. Photoabsorption cross sections from 10 to 100keV are computed using the analytic ts of Verner & Yakovlev (1995). The Compton scattering cross section at energies higher than 10keV, which is the binding energy of the K-shell electrons, is given by the Klein-Nishina formula(e.g., Rybicki & Lightman 1979). We reduce the number of free parameters by making a number of simplications. We assume that the formation of molecules and dust has a negligible impact on the X-ray absorption properties (see Section 5.3). It is also assumed that all atoms are in the neutral ground state. Cross sections for single and double ionization are included in Table 2 of Gatuzz et al. (2015) and general cases can be explored using the analytic ts of Verner & Yakovlev (1995) and Verner et al. (1996). Detailed models of SN1987A show that the ejecta indeed are mainly in neutral and at most in singly ionized states 4 These are also the tables used by the XSPEC model ISMabs(Gatuzz (low ionization ions such as Mg II, Si II, Ca II, and Fe II, Jerkstrand et al. 2011). This is also expected for young SNe in general. For remnants like Cas A, complicated. The effect of ionization above 0.3keV is small in most cases, but quantitative estimates would require detailed knowledge of the ionization state of the gas. Another simplication is that we group some of the elements traced by the nucleosynthesis network. This is done because of radioactive decay and because we aim to provide column densities of elements that are abundant and included in publicly available ISM models. We combine the number densities of 40Ca, 44Ca, 44Sc, 44Ti, and 48Cr and treat the combined number density as 40Ca. The elements 44Ti, 44Sc, and 44Ca form a radioactive decay chain with 44Ca as the stable product. The difference between isotopes of the same element is negligible because the cross sections are determined by the electrons. For reference, the number of neutrons of an atom is not a parameter in the analytic ts of the photoabsorption cross sections(Ver ner & Yakovlev 1995; Verner et al. 1996) and the Klein Nishina formula. The element 48Cr is treated as 40Ca because 48Cr decays into 48Ti, which makes Ca the most similar element commonly included in absorption models in XSPEC. We apply the same grouping to 52Fe, 56Fe, 56Co, 56Ni, and X and treat the group as 56Fe. The elements 56Ni, 56Co, and 56Fe constitute the decay chain from 56Ni to the stable isotope 56Fe. abundant isotopes, 56Ni and 56Co have all decayed into 56Fe. The mass numbers of all atoms will henceforth be omitted. A complete absorption description requires knowledge of the column densities of all elements for all directions. We do not intend to provide a description at this level of detail. Instead, we focus on direction-averaged column number densities and optical depths in Section 4.1, with the purpose of providing representative values for quantities of interest. The optical depth variations along different directions are explored in Section 4.2. This represents the level of variance of the optical depth within a specic SNR. We supercially investigate the differences introduced by different compositions along differ ent lines of sight in Section 4.3. Results concerning Compton scattering are contained in Section 4.4. A comparison of SN Appendix B. Throughout the analysis, we assume that atoms are in the neutral ground state and that molecules and dust has a negligible impact on the relevant absorption properties (Section 3). absorption with ISM absorption is All presented results are at a time of 10,000 days unless otherwise stated. However, the column densities and optical depths can be scaled to other epochs as t2, where t is the time since the SN explosion, if the ejecta are assumed to expand homologously. The models are evolved up to the point when the ejecta start expanding homologously, implying that Homologous expansion is a reasonable approximation until the reverse shock reaches the material with velocities of kms1, which dominates the contribution to the optical depths (Section 4.1). The time at which this happens varies over more than an order of magnitude because the dynamics are sensitive to explosion energy, ejecta mass, and density distribution of the ejecta and circumstellar medium along the line of sight. For SN1987A, the inner ejecta along our line of  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Direction-averaged Column Number Densities at 10,000 Days a Direction-averaged column number density of the SN ejecta. b Direction-averaged SN abundance relative to hydrogen. c Relative SN ejecta abundances in units of corresponding ISM abundances(Wilms et al. 2000), equivalent to A d Direction-averaged column number density of electrons of the SN ejecta. Same as N n , and scaled by the number of electrons of the corresponding chemical sight can safely be assumed to be expanding freely at present epochs for our purposes. For CasA, has reached ejecta expanding at 5500kms1(Morse et al. 2004). In general, theoretical models predict that the inner ejecta expand freely for up to a few thousand years for simple models of core-collapse SNe(e.g., Truelove & McKee 1999). However, in extreme cases, such as for TypeIIn SNe and for lines of sight crossing the dense inner ring of SN1987A (Fransson et al. 2013), the timescales can be much shorter. 4.1. Direction-averaged Optical Depths The direction-averaged column densities of all elements at 10,000 days are provided in Table 3. The SN abundances relative to hydrogen are given by A abundances(Wilms et al. 2000) normalized to hydrogen. The SN ejecta have very high metallicities compared to the ISM (see Appendix B for comparisons with ISM absorption). Direction-averaged optical depths for all models and the individual contributions for the B15 model at 10,000 days are shown in Figure 2. The optical depths are high and the ejecta are opaque for soft X-rays for several decades after the explosion. A typical optical depth for the non-stripped models The optical depth for the IIb model is approximately an order of magnitude lower because the expansion velocity is higher, which is a consequence of having removed all but 0.5M of the hydrogen envelope. The decrease in optical depth because of the removed hydrogen is subdominant because the contribution from hydrogen is small even in the non-stripped models. The general behavior is that He, C, O, Si, Ca, and Fe are all dominating in different models within certain energy ranges. The differences are determined by the relative abundances of the metals. However, the relative abundances of the metals are the small -networks used for  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 2. (Left) Direction-averaged optical depths for all models. The dashed lines are photoabsorption, the dotted lines are Compton scattering, and the solid lines are the sums. The blue B15 line is partially covered by the green L15 line in the photoabsorption regime and the red W15 line in the scattering regime. The non-stripped models are very similar to each other and signicantly different from the IIb model, which expels the ejecta at higher velocities because all but 0.5M of the hydrogen has been articially removed. (Right) The individual contributions of all chemical elements to the optical depth for the B15 model. The individual contributions in all other models are qualitatively similar. Figure 3. (Left) Cumulative direction-averaged optical depth at 10,000 days at 2keV as a function of velocity for all models. The optical depth of the IIb model has been scaled by a factor of 20 for visual clarity. The effect of the cutoff at 2400kms1 for the IIb model is expected to be small (Section 3). The density gradient at the inner boundary of the IIb model is very steep because of a much weaker reverse shock, which is a consequence of the lack of a hydrogen envelope. (Right) Contribution to the cumulative 2keV optical depth per log(velocity) for the B15 model. Mathematically, this is d (2 keV)/d log (v), where v is the velocity. The Compton scattering (CS) contribution and sum have been scaled for visual clarity. The bump at 2500kms1 in the scattering contribution is from hydrogen. The distribution is qualitatively similar for the other models. The cumulative direction-averaged optical depth at 2keV as a function of velocity is shown in Figure 3 (left) for all models. The dominant contribution to the optical depth is from ejecta with velocities in the range 4002000kms1 for the non stripped models. The velocity range is shifted to higher velocities by a factor of 3 for the IIb model because of the higher average ejecta velocity. We also analyze the contribu tions to the cumulative distribution from individual elements (Figure 3, right) and nd that the general trend is that the contributions from all metals are from approximately the same velocities. There is a trend that contributions from heavier elements are on average from velocities lower than those of lighter elements. The effect of this is less than a factor of a few in velocity, which is comparable to the spread in velocities for 4.2. Asymmetries of the Ejecta SN explosions are highly asymmetric and a consequence is that the absorption depends on the line of sight (Section 2.5). The projections of the optical depths for all directions of the B15 and IIb models are shown in Figure 4. All models show pronounced asymmetric clumpy structures or laments. The variances in optical depths are caused by a combination of varying amounts of ejecta expelled in different directions and varying compositions of the ejecta. We also visually inspected projections of column number individual elements (not shown). The most uniformly distributed elements are the light elements H, He, and C, whereas the heavy elements Ca and Fe are the most asymmetrically distributed. To a certain extent, the directions of high abundances of heavy elements are anti-correlated with  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 4. Equal-area Hammer projections of the optical depth at an energy of 2keV of the B15 (top) and IIb (bottom) models at 10,000 days. The projection looks qualitatively similar at different energies for each of the models. The relative strength of the different structures that can be seen varies across absorption edges because of different compositions. Figure 5. Cumulative distribution functions of the optical depth at 10,000 days as functions of direction. The horizontal gray lines show 90%, 50%, and 10%. The non-stripped models are very similar, while the IIb model has lower optical depths. The iron-peak elements in the IIb model are also more asymmetrically distributed. This is clearly seen from the very wide CDF at 8keV. light elements. We interpret this as rising clumps of heavy elements that pierce through the outer shells of the progenitor and leave holes or push the light elements into laments. It is often the case that the clumps consist of heavier elements, whereas the smoother variations and laments are lighter elements from the outer layers of the progenitor. representation of asymmetries is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the optical depth. In the CDFs, the asymmetries are correlated to the width of the distribution. The optical depth CDFs at 0.5, 8, and 100keV are shown in Figure 5. The qualitative and quantitative behaviors of the non stripped models are similar. The optical depths of the IIb model are clearly lower, but the distribution of optical depths is also wider. The most notable feature of the CDFs over all directions is the very wide distribution at 8keV for the IIb model, which is the result of the highly asymmetric distribution of iron-peak elements. More quantitative measurements of the asymmetries are given by the variations in optical depths at given energies for each model, which are provided in Table 4. The condence intervals represent the 1- intervals of the optical depth as a function of direction, which are at a level of approximately 20%40%. We also include the ratio of the upper bound to the lower bound as a relative measure of asymmetry variance. The optical depth for a given model and energy typically spans a factor of 1.52. It is also clear from the variance measures that the IIb model is more asymmetric, in particular around 8keV where the iron-peak elements dominate the opacity. The results up to this point have focused on the direction averaged optical depth and variance of the optical depth introduced by both asymmetric distribution of material and composition. It is possible to isolate the contribution to the variance of varying composition, which affects the energy dependence of the optical depth. We do not attempt to quantify the distribution of abundances of all Instead, we dene the effective slope  by where SN,eff is the effective cross section of the SN ejecta. The lighter elements have steeper energy dependencies and heavier elements have shallower dependen cies. Therefore, the effective slope can serve as a representation of the variations in compositions as a function of direction. The advantage of introducing  in place of the composition is that the composition depends on 11 parameters (all elements). The drawback is that it provides no insight into the relative abundances of heavier elements, which determine the relative strength of absorption edges. We choose to measure  as the slope between 0.3 and 10keV. Figure 6 shows the distribution of  for all directions. The non-stripped models are similar and have distributions that overlap almost completely, whereas the IIb model shows a wider distribution of a. This is a consequence of  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Asymmetry Measures (1 Condence Intervals) Notes. The 1 condence intervals of the optical depths refer to the standard deviations of  along different directions. This is effectively a measure of the asymmetry a E, optical depth at 10,000days at energy E in keV. b VE, ratio of the 1s upper to the 1 lower limit of E. asymmetric distribution of iron-peak elements in the IIb model. For all models, there is a signicant spread in the distribution, which indicates that the composition is varying. It is worth pointing out that even though the slope is dened over the range 0.310keV, absorption is often only important limited interval where the optical depth is around unity. This is because any lower opacity leaves the spectrum relatively unaffected, whereas higher depths are likely to completely to photoabsorption, Compton scattering will not destroy the photon, but will result in a down-scattering of the photon energy, until photoabsorption dominates. This was discussed for the early radioactive phase in SN1987A dominated by 56Ni and 57Ni decay, as well as for pulsar input (e.g., Ebisuzaki & Shibazaki 1988; Grebenev & Syunyaev 1988; Xu et al. 1988, and references therein). Here, we limit ourselves to estimates of the optical depths and do not further discuss the spectrum resulting from the scattering. Figure 2 shows the contribution of Compton scattering to the optical depth. At 10,000 days, ~  - for the IIb model. The dominating contribution to the scattering depth is by hydrogen and helium. The relative contributions can be seen from the electron column number densities provided in Table 3. Assuming homologous expan sion, the scattering depth at 1MeV is unity at 1000 days for the non-stripped models and 150 days for the IIb model. The total optical depths above 50keV are dominated by Compton scattering. The spread in scattering depths can be seen in Figure 5 and Table 4. The RSGs have lower asymmetry variances in the scattering regime. The main reason for this is that scattering is dominated by lighter elements, which are more uniformly distributed in the more extended envelopes of the RSGs. The absorption to the central regions of SNRs is high for X-rays for a long time after the explosion. If the ejecta expand homologously, the optical depth below 2keV remains above unity for more than a century for the non-stripped models and reaches unity at 10keV at approximately 30 years. The the hydrogen envelope is stripped off, the SN explosion expels the ejecta at a factor of three higher velocities, which results in a factor of nine lower optical depths. The contribution of Figure 6. Probability distribution of the effective slope of the effective cross section () for all directions. The effective slope is dened by Equation (2). Different compositions result in different effective cross sections. Thus, the effective slope serves as a proxy for the composition. hydrogen to the optical depth constitutes less than 10% of the total photoabsorption depth above 0.3keV for all models (Figure 2). The expansion velocity v is also connected to the ejecta mass. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that higher explosion energies or lower ejecta masses lead to higher expansion velocities and lower optical depths. Another important property of ejecta absorption is that the metallicity is much higher than standard ISM abundances. This implies that the hydrogen column density commonly used by X-ray astronomers is a poor parameterization of the absorption. The effective cross section is much higher for high-metallicity gas than for standard ISM compositions. The energy depend ence of the effective cross section is signicantly flatter for metal-rich than metal-poor gas, primarily because high metallicity gas has more pronounced absorption edges, mostly K-shell edges, in the 0.310keV energy range. The stronger absorption edges are likely to be the most robust observational signature of high-metallicity absorption, because the difference in continuum absorption is likely degenerate with underlying Compton scattering dominates the optical depth above 50keV and the energy dependence of the scattering depth is weak for energies lower than 100keV. The transition energy of 50keV is higher than the typical value for ISM compositions, where the transition occurs at 10keV. The reason for this is  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 the higher metallicity of the SN ejecta, which signicantly increases the importance of photoabsorption and has a much smaller effect on the scattering properties. 5.2. Comparison with Previous Estimates In general, previous studies found SN ejecta absorption properties comparable to our estimates. However, no previous work has explored 3D SN explosion models, quantied the uncertainties introduced by SN asymmetries, or compared Fransson & Chevalier (1987) modeled the absorption for X-rays in SN1987A using the 15 M 1D model 4A from Woosley et al. (1988). They showed the photoabsorption optical depth in their Figure 1 and found that the optical depth reaches unity at 10keV at 18years. This can be compared to our estimates for BSGs, which show that the optical depth at 10keV reaches unity at 30 years. However, they noted that using the 25 M model 8A(Woosley et al. 1988) resulted in optical depths that are a factor of 2.2 higher, which better agrees with our results. Fransson & Chevalier (1987) also concluded that Compton scattering starts dominating over photoabsorption in the 30100keV range, depending on the Seramovich et al. (2004) used the 15 M 1D model 14E1 of Blinnikov et al. (2000) to estimate the ejecta absorption in the 1000 year-old pulsar PSR B054069.3 in the Large Magella nic Cloud. They reported that the effective cross section for SN ejecta is 40 times higher than the standard value for ISM abundances (see Appendix B) and that the effect of ejecta absorption is negligible because of the age of PSR B0540 69.3, which agrees with our results. Orlando et al. (2015) performed simulations describing SN1987A and found an ejecta hydrogen column density of 31022 cm2 at 30 years. This number is close to our values of the hydrogen column number densities (Table 3). However, they did not report the chemical composition of the ejecta, which is critical for a complete absorption estimate. Esposito et al. (2018) used the model lm18a7Ad of Dessart & Hillier (2010, provided to them by S. E. Woosley). It is a 1D model with a total ejecta mass of 15.6M. Esposito et al. homogeneous distribution, and estimated the density based on approximations. They reported a hydrogen column density of 7.61021 cm2 for the ejecta, which should result absorption properties comparable to our estimates for the abundances provided in their Table 2. There are several sources of uncertainty that we have neglected. The presented uncertainties on the optical depths in the variance introduced by the asymmetries for a given model. One of the purposes of providing column densities for comparable models is to get a handle on the uncertainties associated with the progenitor properties, stellar evolution, and explosion simulations. The the results to progenitor models and early explosion simulations can be estimated by comparing the four non-stripped models. They were not tuned to represent the same progenitor, only B15 and N20 were designed to match the progenitor of SN1987A in broad terms(see Utrobin et al. 2015). Our results show that properties of all non-stripped models are relatively similar. This is most clearly seen from the CDFs in Figure 5 and the values in Table 4. The differences between the direction-averaged properties of the models are comparable to the asymmetry uncertainties within each model. This indicates that the effects of progenitor properties and asymmetry uncertainties are comparable for a given SN type. Observations of nearby SNRs nd dust masses of 0.1M or larger in CasA(Rho et al. 2008; Barlow et al. 2010), the Crab Nebula(Gomez et al. 2012; Owen & Barlow 2015), and SN1987A (Matsuura et al. 2011, 2015; Indebetouw et al. 2014; Dwek & Arendt 2015). Molecules composed of metals have also been detected in CasA(Rho et al. 2012), the Crab Nebula(Barlow et al. 2013; Bentley et al. 2018), and SN1987A (Kamenetzky et al. 2013; Abelln et al. 2017; Matsuura et al. 2017). However, the formation of dust and molecules from the ejecta material only has a small effect on the X-ray absorption properties(Morrison & McCammon 1983; Draine 2003). Photoabsorption in soft X-rays is dominated by inner-shell absorption, which is approximately the same for their constituents and Compton scattering only depends on the electron column density. Additionally, we do not consider the effects of the compact object kick velocity. A full treatment would require investigation of absorption to all positions that the compact object can have the 3D kick velocity is rarely known. Some insight into the possible effects of kick velocities on absorption is provided by Figure 3, which shows at what radii the gas contributes to the optical depth. For kick velocities of 500kms1, the maximum effect on the optical depth is 50% if the kick happens to be aligned with our line of sight. For reference, we note that pulsars are inferred from observations to have 3D kick velocities of 400250kms1(Hobbs et al. 2005; Faucher-Gigure & Kaspi 2006), with some extreme cases up to 1600kms1 (Cordes et al. 1993; Chatterjee & Cordes 2002, 2004; Hobbs et al. 2005). 5.3.1. Progenitor and Explosion Models All results rely on the SN progenitors and explosion models. These are not fully self-consistent and it is difcult to exactly quantify the uncertainties introduced by them. We nd it unlikely that the model uncertainties have a major, qualitative impact on our conclusions. What follows is a brief description of some of the contributing factors. The explosion models that we use do not include a longer lasting phase of simultaneous accretion and mass outflow around the NS after the onset of the explosion, as suggested to exist by present self-consistent models(Mller et al. 2017). Having such a phase of accretion and outflow instead of the spherical wind that boosts the explosion in the simulations, is likely to lead to more extreme asymmetries in the innermost 0.1M of the ejecta. Therefore, the inner half of the iron group matter is likely to be more asymmetrically distributed. Additionally, the 3D simulations contain no information about mixing below the grid scale, but this is not important for the X-ray absorption properties because the absorption only relies on the total column densities. Overall, the explosion dynamics is roughly compatible with our present-day knowledge of how neutrino-driven explosions work. Moreover, the asymmetries we nd in the simulations are able to produce the mixing needed to explain the light curve of SN1987A(Utrobin et al. 2015),  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 (Wongwathanarat et al. 2017), or, roughly, the asymmetries of SiO and CO molecules observed in SN1987A(Abelln et al. 2017). However, an important caveat for the SN1987A models is that they are based on single-star progenitors. The progenitor of SN1987A was most likely the result of a merger, which is primarily supported by the triple-ring structure surrounding the SN (Blondin & Lundqvist 1993; Morris & Podsiadlowski 2007; Menon & Heger 2017; Urushibata et al. 2018). The mixing properties of the merger models are different and the masses of the helium and oxygen cores are also much lower than those for the single-star progenitors. However, the set of progenitors considered in our study covers a fairly wide range of pre-collapse proles, and one case (B15) has a core structure with similarities to the core properties of some of the binary models of Menon & Heger (2017). The relative abundances of the different metals are also Section 3.1 of Wongwathanarat et al. 2017). This uncertainty only applies to the relative abundances of metals and leaves the total mass and spatial distribution unaffected. Model B15, despite its ability to yield efcient mixing and to explain the SN1987A light curve fairly well, is far from being a perfect case for SN1987A. In particular, the NS mass is too low. A baryonic mass of 1.25M corresponds to a gravitational mass of only 1.15M. It is extremely unlikely that SN1987A produced a NS with such a record-low mass(see zel & Freire 2016). This problem is most likely due to the progenitor structure for B15 rather than the explosion modeling. 5.4. Implications for Observations The high X-ray absorption in young SNRs affects interpreta tions of observations. We have focused on CasA and SN1987A, but the absorption estimates also apply to other extragalactic SNRs. Processes that produce X-rays from young compact objects are thermal surface emission, fallback accretion, and pulsar wind activity. Ejecta absorption obscures any X-ray emission and is generally applicable, but it is possible that extended sources, such as powerful pulsar wind nebulae, produce a signicant amount of radiation from outer regions where the absorption is expected to be lower. Another remark on pulsar wind nebulae is that they produce synchrotron emission that extends to high X-ray energies (for a high-energy compilation of the pulsed emission, see Figure 28 of Kuiper & Hermsen 2015) where Compton scattering is dominat ing. Given the low scattering depths, the obscuration due to scattering is most likely only important during the rst few years. Another source of high-energy radiation is from radioactive elements synthesized in SN explosions that emit lines in the Compton absorption regime when decaying. This was seen in early observations of SN1987A(Dotani et al. 1987; Sunyaev et al. 1987; Matz et al. 1988). The rst sign of radioactive line emission at intermediate optical depths is the emergence of down scattered X-ray emission, which is then followed by the direct line emission when the ejecta has expanded further. The time and escaping fluxes of the radioactive emission convey information about the level of mixing of the radioactive elements and could be used to test the accuracy of the SN explosion simulations. Ejecta absorption can potentially also explain the lack of detection of K-shell emission lines resulting from electron capture in radioactive elements produced by the SN (Leising 2001, 2006; Theiling & Leising 2006). Radioactive K-shell lines have been observed in G1.9+0.3, which is the remnant of a thermonuclear SN(Borkowski et al. 2010). Because of the lower mass and higher expansion velocity of TypeIa SNe, the X-ray absorption should be considerably smaller for a given age. We focus on absorption toward the center of SNRs. The absorption along lines of sight that pierce outer parts of the ejecta have different properties. This is mostly relevant for spatially resolved studies of SNRs. Figure 3 provides some insight into the radial distribution of absorbing gas. We do not attempt investigate all possible sightlines. The difference introduced by the shifting line of sight is not simply a matter of geometrical scaling because the metallicity is higher for paths into the center and lower toward the outer boundary of the ejecta. An effect of this in SN1987A can be seen in Figure 22 and23 of Fransson et al. (2013). The penetration of the X-rays from the ring interaction is considerably deeper in the directions of the outer hydrogen envelope compared to the radial penetration in the core direction. In SN1987A, the absorption is high and signicantly affects observations of the compact object. The analysis is presented in detail in a separate work(Alp et al. 2018). Here, we note that the differences in optical depth for the different BSG progenitor models B15 and N20 are less than a factor of two and the RSGs also show comparable properties (Section 4). A difference of a factor of two in the optical depth approximately corresponds to a factor of two in the allowed luminosities. This uncertainty is comparable to the other uncertainties discussed in Section 5.3. The effect of absorption is expected to be relatively small for the Galactic SNRs. We nd a negligible effect of absorption on the interpretation of Chandra observations of the CCO in CasA (Appendix A). However, observations of SNRs with higher numbers of total counts or higher energy resolutions should be able to disentangle small effects of ejecta absorption. Our estimates also show that the low-energy X-ray emission from a compact object in a future Galactic SN will be heavily obscured for many decades. It is unlikely that even future telescopes will be able to directly observe emission from newly created compact objects at energies less than 5 keV during luminous, such as the Crab(Bhler & Blandford 2014). few decades unless the compact object Accurate models of absorption are critical for analyses of X-ray observations of SNRs. We use 3D simulations of neutrino-driven SN explosions(Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015) to estimate the column densities of the most abundant elements along the line of sight to the center of the ejecta. The column densities are used to compute the optical depth for X-rays due to photoabsorption and Compton scattering. This provides both the amount and composition of the obscuring gas. We use our absorption models to place new X-ray limits on the compact object in SN1987A in an accompanying paper(Alp et al. 2018), and re-analyze the X-ray spectrum of the CCO in CasA (Appendix A). Our main conclusions are as follows: 1. The optical depth for X-rays is high for a long time after the SN explosion. For the models with a hydrogen envelope, the optical depth between 0.1 and 50keV is since the explosion in units of 10,000 days (27 years) and E is the energy in units of keV. 2. The optical depth above 50keV is dominated by Compton scattering and is 13102 at 10,000 days for models with a hydrogen envelope. Scaling backward in time,  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 scattering depth to the center is unity at around 1000 days 3. The optical depth is approximately an order of magnitude lower for the IIb model, which has lost all but 0.5M of its hydrogen envelope. This model explodes as a TypeIIb SN and shows similarity to CasA. The optical 4. The expected level of absorption in CasA based on estimates using the IIb model results in a decrease in the inferred CCO surface temperature of less than 1% at all epochs, which is lower than the statistical uncertainty. We also nd that the ejecta absorption component would be degenerate with the ISM absorption, if ejecta absorption were signicant. This is a result of the limited statistics instrumental energy resolution, and degeneracy with the parameters of other model components. metallicity of the SN ejecta is 2 orders of magnitude higher than for the ISM. This implies that the hydrogen column number density is a poor measure of absorption because the effective cross section is much higher. The high metallicity results in a flatter energy dependence of the cross section and stronger metal edges for the absorption prole. the same hydrogen column number density, We thank the anonymous referee for the helpful comments. This research was funded by the Knut & Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council. At Garching, this research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through Excellence Cluster universe (EXC 153;http://www. universe-cluster.de/) and Sonderforschungsbereich SFB 1258 Neutrinos and Dark Matter in Astro- and Particle Physics, and by the European Research Council through grant ERC-AdG No. 341157-COCO2CASA. The computations of models were carried out on Hydra of the Max Planck Computing and Data Facility (MPCDF) Garching and on the Cluster of the Computational Center for Particle and Astrophysics (C2PAP) Garching. The scientic results reported in this article are based in part on data obtained from the Chandra Data Archive. This research has made use of software provided by the Chandra X-ray Center (CXC) in the application package CIAO. This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Data System. Software: astropy(Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013), CIAO/ CALDB(Fruscione et al. 2006), matplotlib(Hunter 2007), MARX(Davis et al. 2012), numpy(Jones et al. 2001; van der Walt et al. 2011), PROMETHEUS(Fryxell et al. 1991; Mller et al. 1991), PROMETHEUS-HOTB, PROMETHEUS-VERTEX (Rampp & Janka 2002), scipy(Jones et al. 2001), XSPEC (Arnaud 1996). Note added in proof. A follow-up paper on the Cas A CCO was recently published by Posselt & Pavlov (2018). They nd no signicant temperature decrease and conclude that previous analyses were affected by instrumental effects, which could cause time dependent spectral distortions. A.1. Observations and Data Reduction We analyze the three archival Chandra observations that were performed using an instrumental minimize spectral distortions of the CCO. Details of these Chandra CasA CCO Observations a Dened as the number of counts extracted from the source region. b Dened as the fraction of the source counts that are signal, whereas the rest is observations are presented in Table 5. We reduce the data using CIAO 4.9 and CALDB 4.7.7(Fruscione et al. 2006) and follow standard data reduction guidelines. No strong background flares are detected and the data are ltered by removing all intervals that deviate from the mean by more than 4. All source spectra are extracted from circular regions with radii of 2 pixels (492 mas pixel1). All background spectra are extracted from annuli centered on the source position. The inner radii of the annuli are 3 pixels and the outer annuli are 5 pixels. The spectra are binned such that the signal-to-noise level is at least 10 in each bin. Spectral tting is performed using XSPEC version 12.9.1p(Arnaud 1996). Our aim is to investigate if ejecta absorption has a signicant effect on the interpretation of the observed spectra of the CCO in CasA. To do this, we choose a model consisting of thermal emission from an NS surface with a carbon atmosphere, which is modeled using the XSPEC model carbatm(Suleimanov et al. 2014). We use the model tbabs(Wilms et al. 2000), with wilm abundances from Wilms et al. (2000) for the ISM absorption. The ejecta absorption is modeled using the XSPEC model tbvarabs(Wilms et al. 2000), which allows for setting the individual abundances. We take the column densities of the IIb model (Table 3) because it shows similarity to CasA(Wongwathanarat et al. 2017). All column densities are scaled to 340 years, assuming homologous expansion and ignoring the SNR age difference of the observations. To study an extreme scenario, we scale the average column densities by a factor of 4.1. This value is the ratio of the 99.7th percentile of the optical depth at 2keV to the direction-averaged optical depth at 2keV. This can be interpreted as a 3 upper limit on the ejecta absorption for the IIb model. The result of scaling to an age of 340 years and taking the 3 upper limit is that the optical depth at 1keV is 0.2, implying that the total effect of ejecta absorption is expected to be small. We perform the t of the model simultaneously to the three observations. The results of all ts are presented in Table 6. First, we start by ignoring any ejecta absorption. The NS mass is frozen to 1.647M and the radius is frozen to 10.33km, to allow for comparisons with previous works(Heinke & Ho 2010; Posselt et al. 2013). The normalization of the NS carbon atmosphere model is a ratio of the fraction of the surface that is emitting (A) over the distance squared in units of 10kpc. We leave the normalization free to allow for any normalization errors, but tied it across all observations because we do not the emitting fraction or distance to change. For a  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 CasA CCO Fitting Results (1 Condence Intervals) a Free but tied across observations. b Frozen to IIb model prediction. c Local (unredshifted) temperature. distance of 3.4kpc, the normalization is 8.65 for A=1. The ISM hydrogen column density NISM(H) is left free because the absorption toward CasA is uncertain(Keohane et al. 1996; Salas et al. 2018), but it is tied across observations because it is not expected to vary signicantly on these timescales. Additionally, we nd no statistically signicant improvement by leaving NISM(H) untied. The local (unredshifted) blackbody temperature (T) is left free. Next, we include the extreme-case 3 ejecta absorption. The best-t parameters are shown in the second segment of Table 6. The additional ejecta absorption component has no signicant impact and the t remains essentially unchanged. This is expected because of the low optical depth of 0.2 at 1keV, which implies that the difference should be very small. the bulk expansion velocity or To explore a case of signicant absorption, we add another factor of 10 to the 3 absorption. The factor of 10 is arbitrarily chosen but the scenario could represent a case where the IIb lamentary structures of higher density have formed along the line of sight. The best-t values for this case are also provided in Table 6. The t is statistically slightly worse but still acceptable. The additional ejecta absorption is nearly completely degenerate with the other components, particularly the ISM absorption, but also the temperature and normalization The conclusion is that the expected level of ejecta absorption based on our models has an insignicant effect on the estimated temperature of the CCO. The difference in inferred temperature is less than 1% between the t without and with 3 ejecta absorption, which is lower than the statistical uncertainty. Additionally, the effect is a similar level of decrease at all epochs, which does not affect investigations of the cooling of Comparison with ISM Absorption the SN abundances with the ISM abundances(Wilms et al. 2000) is provided in Table 3. It is common in X-ray astronomy to quantify absorption by the hydrogen column number density and to assume standard abundances of all other elements with respect to hydrogen. This assumption breaks down for ejecta absorption because the metallicity of the SN ejecta is much higher than that of the ISM. The result is that the effective cross section of the SN ejecta is much higher, falls slower as a function of energy, and the metal absorption edges are stronger. The effective cross sections for the ve models and the ISM, as well as the ratio of the SN ejecta to ISM cross sections, are shown in Figure 7.  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Figure 7. Comparison of the effective cross sections of the SN ejecta for the ve models with the ISM cross section. The left panel shows the cross sections as functions of energy and the right panel shows the ratio of the ejecta cross sections to the ISM cross section. We note that the SN effective cross sections are much larger, show shallower energy dependencies, and have much stronger discontinuous absorption features. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0427-5592 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0065-2933 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8532-3594 Abelln, F. J., Indebetouw, R., Marcaide, J. M., et al. 2017, ApJL, 842, L24 Alp, D., Larsson, J., & Fransson, C. 2018, arXiv:1805.04526 Anders, E., & Grevesse, N. 1989, GeCoA, 53, 197 Arnaud, K. A. 1996, in ASP Conf. Ser. 101, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems V, ed. G. H. Jacoby & J. Barnes (San Francisco, CA: Arnett, W. D., Bahcall, J. N., Kirshner, R. P., & Woosley, S. E. 1989, Ashworth, W. B., Jr. 1980, JHA, 11, 1 Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, Barlow, M. J., Krause, O., Swinyard, B. M., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L138 Barlow, M. J., Swinyard, B. M., Owen, P. J., et al. 2013, Sci, 342, 1343 Bentley, R., Wootten, A., Loh, E., et al. 2018, AAS Meeting Abstracts #231, Bethe, H. A., & Salpeter, E. E. 1957, Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two Electron Atoms (New York: Academic) Bionta, R. M., Blewitt, G., Bratton, C. B., Casper, D., & Ciocio, A. 1987, Blinnikov, S., Lundqvist, P., Bartunov, O., Nomoto, K., & Iwamoto, K. 2000, Blondin, J. M., & Lundqvist, P. 1993, ApJ, 405, 337 Borkowski, K. J., Reynolds, S. P., Green, D. A., et al. 2010, ApJL, 724, L161 Bratton, C. B., Casper, D., Ciocio, A., et al. 1988, PhRvD, 37, 3361 Bruenn, S. W. 1993, in Nuclear Physics in the Universe, ed. M. W. Guidry & M. R. Strayer (Bristol: IOPP), 31 Bhler, R., & Blandford, R. 2014, RPPh, 77, 066901 Chakrabarty, D., Pivovaroff, M. J., Hernquist, L. E., Heyl, J. S., & Narayan, R. Chatterjee, S., & Cordes, J. M. 2002, ApJ, 575, 407 Chatterjee, S., & Cordes, J. M. 2004, ApJL, 600, L51 Cordes, J. M., Romani, R. W., & Lundgren, S. C. 1993, Natur, 362, 133 Davis, J. E., Bautz, M. W., Dewey, D., et al. 2012, Proc. SPIE, 8443, 84431A Dessart, L., & Hillier, D. J. 2010, MNRAS, 405, 2141 Dickey, J. M., & Lockman, F. J. 1990, ARA&A, 28, 215 Dotani, T., Hayashida, K., Inoue, H., et al. 1987, Natur, 330, 230 Draine, B. T. 2003, ApJ, 598, 1026 Dwek, E., & Arendt, R. G. 2015, ApJ, 810, 75 Ebisuzaki, T., & Shibazaki, N. 1988, ApJL, 327, L5 Elshamouty, K. G., Heinke, C. O., Sivakoff, G. R., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 22 Esposito, P., Rea, N., Lazzati, D., et al. 2018, ApJ, 857, 58 Faucher-Gigure, C.-A., & Kaspi, V. M. 2006, ApJ, 643, 332 Fesen, R. A., Hammell, M. C., Morse, J., et al. 2006, ApJ, 645, 283 Flamsteed, J. 1725, Historia Coelestis Britannicae, tribus Voluminibus contenta Fransson, C., & Chevalier, R. A. 1987, ApJL, 322, L15 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 88 Fruscione, A., McDowell, J. C., Allen, G. E., et al. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6270, 62701V Fryxell, B., Arnett, D., & Mueller, E. 1991, ApJ, 367, 619 Garca, J., Kallman, T. R., Witthoeft, M., et al. 2009, ApJS, 185, 477 Garca, J., Mendoza, C., Bautista, M. A., et al. 2005, ApJS, 158, 68 Gatuzz, E., Garca, J., Kallman, T. R., Mendoza, C., & Gorczyca, T. W. 2015, Gomez, H. L., Krause, O., Barlow, M. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 760, 96 Gorczyca, T. W. 2000, PhRvA, 61, 024702 Gorczyca, T. W., Bautista, M. A., Hasoglu, M. F., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 78 Grebenev, S. A., & Syunyaev, R. A. 1988, SvAL, 14, 288 Grevesse, N., & Sauval, A. J. 1998, SSRv, 85, 161 Hasolu, M. F., Abdel-Naby, S. A., Gatuzz, E., et al. 2014, ApJS, 214, 8 Heinke, C. O., & Ho, W. C. G. 2010, ApJL, 719, L167 HI4PI Collaboration, Ben Bekhti, N., Fler, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A116 Hirata, K., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., Nakahata, M., & Oyama, Y. 1987, PhRvL, Hirata, K. S., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., et al. 1988, PhRvD, 38, 448 Ho, W. C. G., & Heinke, C. O. 2009, Natur, 462, 71 Hobbs, G., Lorimer, D. R., Lyne, A. G., & Kramer, M. 2005, MNRAS, Hughes, D. W. 1980, Natur, 285, 132 Hunter, J. D. 2007, CSE, 9, 90 Indebetouw, R., Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., et al. 2014, ApJL, 782, L2 Jerkstrand, A., Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2011, A&A, 530, A45 Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy: Open Source Scientic Tools for Python, https://www.scipy.org/ Juett, A. M., Schulz, N. S., Chakrabarty, D., & Gorczyca, T. W. 2006, ApJ, Kageyama, A., & Sato, T. 2004, GGG, 5, Q09005 Kalberla, P. M. W., Burton, W. B., Hartmann, D., et al. 2005, A&A, 440, 775 Kamenetzky, J., McCray, R., Indebetouw, R., et al. 2013, ApJL, 773, L34 Kamper, K. W. 1980, Obs, 100, 3 Keohane, J. W., Rudnick, L., & Anderson, M. C. 1996, ApJ, 466, 309 Kifonidis, K., Plewa, T., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2003, A&A, 408, 621 Kirshner, R. P., Sonneborn, G., Crenshaw, D. M., & Nassiopoulos, G. E. 1987, Kortright, J. B., & Kim, S.-K. 2000, PhRvB, 62, 12216 Krause, O., Birkmann, S. M., Usuda, T., et al. 2008, Sci, 320, 1195 Kuiper, L., & Hermsen, W. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 3827  The Astrophysical Journal, 864:175 (15pp), 2018 September 10 Leising, M. D. 2001, ApJ, 563, 185 Leising, M. D. 2006, ApJ, 651, 1019 Limongi, M., Straniero, O., & Chief, A. 2000, ApJS, 129, 625 Long, K. S., Blair, W. P., Godfrey, L. E. H., et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, 18 Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Barlow, M. J., et al. 2015, ApJ, 800, 50 Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Meixner, M., et al. 2011, Sci, 333, 1258 Matsuura, M., Indebetouw, R., Woosley, S., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3347 Matz, S. M., Share, G. H., Leising, M. D., Chupp, E. L., & Vestrand, W. T. McCray, R. 1993, ARA&A, 31, 175 McCray, R., & Fransson, C. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 19 Menon, A., & Heger, A. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 4649 Morris, T., & Podsiadlowski, P. 2007, Sci, 315, 1103 Morrison, R., & McCammon, D. 1983, ApJ, 270, 119 Morse, J. A., Fesen, R. A., Chevalier, R. A., et al. 2004, ApJ, 614, 727 Mller, B., Melson, T., Heger, A., & Janka, H.-T. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 491 Mller, E., Fryxell, B., & Arnett, D. 1991, A&A, 251, 505 Nomoto, K., & Hashimoto, M. 1988, PhR, 163, 13 Orlando, S., Miceli, M., Pumo, M. L., & Bocchino, F. 2015, ApJ, 810, 168 Owen, P. J., & Barlow, M. J. 2015, ApJ, 801, 141 zel, F., & Freire, P. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 401 Panagia, N. 1999, in IAU Symp. 190, New Views of the Magellanic Clouds, ed. Y.-H. Chu et al. (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 549 Seramovich, N. I., Shibanov, Y. A., Lundqvist, P., & Sollerman, J. 2004, Shigeyama, T., & Nomoto, K. 1990, ApJ, 360, 242 Shtykovskiy, P. E., Lutovinov, A. A., Gilfanov, M. R., & Sunyaev, R. A. 2005, Stage, M. D., Joss, P. C., Madej, J., & Raska, A. 2004, AdSpR, 33, 605 Suleimanov, V. F., Klochkov, D., Pavlov, G. G., & Werner, K. 2014, ApJS, Sunyaev, R., Kaniovsky, A., Efremov, V., et al. 1987, Natur, 330, 227 Tananbaum, H. 1999, IAUC, 7246 Theiling, M. F., & Leising, M. D. 2006, NewAR, 50, 544 Truelove, J. K., & McKee, C. F. 1999, ApJS, 120, 299 Urushibata, T., Takahashi, K., Umeda, H., & Yoshida, T. 2018, MNRAS, Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2015, A&A, van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CSE, 13, 22 Verner, D. A., Ferland, G. J., Korista, K. T., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1996, ApJ, Verner, D. A., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1995, A&AS, 109, 125 Walborn, N. R., Lasker, B. M., Laidler, V. G., & Chu, Y.-H. 1987, ApJL, West, R. M., Lauberts, A., Schuster, H.-E., & Jorgensen, H. E. 1987, A&A, Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Macchetto, F., Adorf, H.-M., & Kirshner, R. P. Pavlov, G. G., Zavlin, V. E., Aschenbach, B., Trmper, J., & Sanwal, D. 2000, Posselt, B., & Pavlov, G. G. 2018, arXiv:180800531 Posselt, B., Pavlov, G. G., Suleimanov, V., & Kargaltsev, O. 2013, ApJ, 779, 186 Rampp, M., & Janka, H.-T. 2002, A&A, 396, 361 Reed, J. E., Hester, J. J., Fabian, A. C., & Winkler, P. F. 1995, ApJ, 440, 706 Rest, A., Foley, R. J., Sinnott, B., et al. 2011, ApJ, 732, 3 Rho, J., Kozasa, T., Reach, W. T., et al. 2008, ApJ, 673, 271 Rho, J., Onaka, T., Cami, J., & Reach, W. T. 2012, ApJL, 747, L6 Rybicki, G. B., & Lightman, A. P. 1979, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics (New York: Wiley-Interscience) Saio, H., Nomoto, K., & Kato, M. 1988, Natur, 334, 508 Salas, P., Oonk, J. B. R., van Weeren, R. J., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 2496 Scheck, L., Kifonidis, K., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2006, A&A, 457, 963 White, G. L., & Malin, D. F. 1987, Natur, 327, 36 Wilms, J., Allen, A., & McCray, R. 2000, ApJ, 542, 914 Winkel, B., Kerp, J., Fler, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 585, A41 Witthoeft, M. C., Bautista, M. A., Mendoza, C., et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, Witthoeft, M. C., Garca, J., Kallman, T. R., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 7 Wongwathanarat, A., Hammer, N. J., & Mller, E. 2010a, A&A, 514, A48 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2010b, ApJL, 725, L106 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2013, A&A, 552, A126 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., Mller, E., Pllumbi, E., & Wanajo, S. 2017, Wongwathanarat, A., Mller, E., & Janka, H.-T. 2015, A&A, 577, A48 Woosley, S. E., Pinto, P. A., & Ensman, L. 1988, ApJ, 324, 466 Woosley, S. E., & Weaver, T. A. 1995, ApJS, 101, 181 Xu, Y., Sutherland, P., McCray, R., & Ross, R. R. 1988, ApJ, 327, 197 The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1  2019. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab3395 X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Emission from Core-collapse Supernovae: Comparison of 1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden; dalp@kth.se Three-dimensional Neutrino-driven Explosions with SN 1987A 2 Department of Astronomy, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan 3 Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, The Oskar Klein Centre, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 4 Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany 5 Monash Centre for Astrophysics, School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia 7 Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 6 Tsung-Dao Lee Institute, Shanghai 200240, Peoples Republic of China Received 2019 June 10; revised 2019 July 17; accepted 2019 July 17; published 2019 August 28 During the rst few hundred days after the explosion, core-collapse supernovae (SNe) emit down-scattered X-rays and gamma-rays originating from radioactive line emissions, primarily from the 56Ni56Co56Fe chain. We use supernova (SN) models based on three-dimensional neutrino-driven explosion simulations of single stars and mergers to compute this emission and compare the predictions with observations of SN1987A. A number of models are clearly excluded, showing that high-energy emission is a powerful way of discriminating between models. The best models are almost consistent with the observations, but differences that cannot be matched by a suitable choice of viewing angle are evident. Therefore, our self-consistent models suggest that neutrino-driven explosions are able to produce, in principle, sufcient mixing, although remaining discrepancies may require small changes to the progenitor structures. The soft X-ray cutoff is primarily determined by the metallicity of the progenitor envelope. The main effect of asymmetries is to vary the flux level by a factor of 3. For the more the shapes of the light curves also change. In addition to the models of SN1987A, we investigate two models of SNeII-P and one model of a stripped-envelope SNIIb. The TypeII-P models have observables similar to those of the models of SN1987A, but the stripped-envelope SN model is signicantly more luminous and evolves faster. Finally, we make simple predictions for future observations of nearby SNe. Unied Astronomy Thesaurus concepts: Core-collapse supernovae (304); X-ray transient sources (1852); Gamma ray transient sources (1853); Supernova dynamics (1664); Gamma-ray lines (631) A core-collapse supernova (CCSN) is the death of a massive star (Baade & Zwicky 1934; Hoyle & Fowler 1960), but the exact nature of the explosion remains obscured. The so-called delayed neutrino-heating mechanism (Arnett 1966; Colgate & White 1966; Bethe & Wilson 1985; Bruenn 1985) is a leading hypothesis in which a stalled shock is revived by neutrinos emitted from the surface of a hot proto-neutron star (for reviews, see Janka 2012, 2017; Burrows 2013; Janka et al. 2016; Mller 2016; Couch 2017). Recent three-dimensional (3D) simulations are able to include the basic physics necessary to describe the neutrino interaction and heating, and to simulate the outcome of the Fe core collapse, which then connects to the long-term simulations involving the whole star (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015, M. Gabler et al. 2019, in preparation). These simulations demonstrated that 3D effects are important both for the neutrino heating and the hydro dynamic instabilities above the Fe core. To verify the supernova (SN) theory and assumptions that go into the simulations, it is important to compare the model predictions with observations. The spatial density and abun dance distributions of the ejecta provide key information about the progenitor and explosion mechanism of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe). Another valuable property that observable is the X-ray and gamma-ray emission up to approximately 1000 days after the explosion(d). This emission arises from the radioactive decays of the unstable isotopes synthesized during the rst few seconds after core collapse (Hoyle 1954; Burbidge et al. 1957; Fowler & Hoyle 1964; Hix & Harris 2017). When an unstable isotope decays, gamma-rays are emitted. These gamma-rays lose energy due to Compton scattering as they propagate through the ejecta, and are then either destroyed by photoelectric absorption or escape the ejecta. An advantage of studying the early X-ray and gamma ray emission is that the emission can be computed directly from microscopic mixing since the thermal conditions are decoupled from the high-energy radiation eld (Jerkstrand et al. 2011). The emission is thus a sensitive probe of the macroscopic mixing and the ejecta structure. Additionally, physics for the photon propagation is well known and the gamma-ray transfer is computationally cheap compared to Several groups have applied this method to compute the X-ray and gamma-ray emission from CCSN models. Previous studies of 3D models have explored bipolar SNII models (Hungerford et al. 2003) and single-lobe TypeII explosion models (Hungerford et al. 2005). Maeda (2006) investigated jet-like broad-lined SN models, and Wollaeger et al. (2017) computed both optical and high-energy spectra from a unimodal 3D model. A large number of models were also created and studied shortly after SN 1987A (for an overview, see McCray 1993). This early modeling of SN1987A was  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 based on much more simplied 1D simulations. There are also several studies that have applied analogous methods to SNIa (Burrows & The 1990; Hflich 2002; Sim 2007; Sim & Mazzali 2008; Kromer & Sim 2009; Maeda et al. 2012; Summa et al. 2013; The & Burrows 2014) and kilonova models (Hotokezaka et al. 2016; Korobkin et al. 2019). In addition to the (down-scattered) X-rays and gamma-rays from the radioactive decay, other processes can also contribute to the high-energy emission. Lines from electron transitions are only relevant below 10keV in SNe, which is at lower energies than the component from the radioactive decay. The photons from the radioactive decay also produce fast recoil electrons through Compton scattering. The bremsstrahlung emission from these electrons is expected to be much fainter than the emission from the radioactive decay in the relevant energy range (Clayton & The 1991; Burrows & van Riper 1995). Interactions with the circumstellar medium (CSM) is another potential source of X-rays (Chevalier & Fransson 1994, 2017). This is a weak component for the vast majority of all SNe (Dwarkadas 2014) and is typically at lower X-ray energies, although the hard X-ray regime is CSM-dominated in some cases. Examples of such cases include the nearby, strongly interacting SN1993J (Leising et al. 1994; Fransson et al. 1996) and the extremely luminous TypeIIn SN2010jl (Chevalier & Irwin 2012; Ofek et al. 2014). Such CSM interaction results in spectra and light curves that are very different from those produced by reprocessed radioactive decay. Additionally, the gamma-ray continuum, and in part icular, the direct line emission from the radioactive decay are unlikely to be confused with other emission components, even In this paper, we compute the early X-ray and gamma-ray emission from recent full 3D SN models based on neutrino driven explosion simulations (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015) and compare the predicted emission properties to observations of SN1987A. SN1987A was a CCSN in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), which makes it the closest observed SN in more than four centuries (for reviews, see Arnett et al. 1989; McCray 1993; McCray & Fransson 2016). The proximity of SN1987A makes it the only CCSN where the early X-ray and gamma-ray evolution have been possible. The comparisons allow us to constrain properties of the ejecta structure and composition, and investigate the viability of recent SN simulations and SN1987A progenitor models. We also investigate models of other types of SNe. This allows us to extend the results to more common SN types and serves as predictions for This paper is organized as follows. We describe the SN models in Section 2 and the observations of SN1987A in Section 3. The algorithm we use for the computations of the early emission is outlined in Section 4, and we present the results in Section 5. We discuss the results and important details in Section 6 and provide a summary and the main We use SN models based on 3D neutrino-driven explosion simulations. An overview of the models is provided in Table 1. All progenitor models are 1D but are mapped into three dimensions with imposed low-amplitude random cell-by-cell perturbations to seed hydrodynamic instabilities for the SN explosion simulations (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). Below, we describe the properties of the models that are most relevant to the current study. Comprehensive descriptions of all simulations can be found in the original references (Table 1). All simulations included the neutrino luminosity as a free parameter, which effectively determines the nal explosion energy (Eexp). We note that we do not use the light-bulb approximation, meaning that the outgoing neutrino luminos ities are considerably modied by the infalling material in our simulations. The neutrino luminosity was tuned to result in explosion energies of 1.51051 erg for all models. This roughly corresponds to estimates for SN1987A (Woosley et al. 1988; Bethe 1990; Bethe & Pizzochero 1990; Shigeyama & Nomoto 1990; Blinnikov et al. 2000; Utrobin 2005), and is also fairly representative for ordinary SNeII-P (Kasen & Woosley 2009; Pejcha & Prieto 2015; Mller et al. 2017) and IIb SNe For a given explosion energy, large variations are expected for the density and abundance distributions of the ejecta, which are determined by a coupled interaction between the explosion dynamics and progenitor structure (Wongwathanarat et al. 2015; Utrobin et al. 2019). In other words, these differences can be used to discriminate different progenitor models using The M15-7b and M16-7b models are the results of mergers, whereas all the other models are single-star models. The B15, N20, M15-7b, and M16-7b models end their lives as blue supergiants (BSGs) and are designed to match the progenitor of SN1987A. The B15 model is the single-star progenitor that yields the best agreement with the optical SN1987A, based on self-consistent 3D explosion models (Utrobin et al. 2015). For the merger models, Menon et al. (2019) present results for articially mixed 1D explosions, while V. Utrobin et al. (2019, in preparation) present light curve analysis based on the 3D neutrino-driven explosion We have investigated all six merger models of Menon & Heger (2017) that match the observational properties of the SN1987A progenitor. We only present results from the M15 7b and M16-7b models here. The M15-7b model ts the X-ray and gamma-ray observations best, and M16-7b is the worst model. This choice means that properties of M15-7b and M16-7b roughly bracket those of the complete set of merger models. type. Finally, model W15-2-cw-IIb (IIb) The L15 and W15 models are red supergiants (RSGs), which allow us to extend the results to SNeII-P, which is the most explosion of a nearly bare He core with a thin H envelope, which shows similarity to CasA (Wongwathanarat et al. 2017). All progenitors except the N20 and IIb models were created using self-consistent stellar evolution simulations. The N20 model (Shigeyama & Nomoto 1990) was created by combining the core (Nomoto & Hashimoto 1988) and envelope (Saio et al. 1988) of two different models. This was done in an attempt to match the properties of the progenitor of SN1987A. The IIb model was created by articially removing all but 0.3 M of the H envelope of Model W15-2-cw. This model is aimed to mimic a typical progenitor star of a SNIIb. The mixing of 56Ni is important for the early X-ray and In Table 1, we provide the mass weighted average radial velocity of the fastest 1% of 56Ni. This is similar to Wongwathanarat et al. (2015). Here, however, we weight the tracer element representing the uncertainty in the  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 a The rst letter does not correspond to any physical quantity but is related to the creators. The two-digit number is approximately the zero-age main-sequence (ZAMS) mass in solar masses. The single-digit number indicates the model number in the series of models varying the explosion energy and initial seed perturbation (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). The last two letters are pw for power-law wind or cw for constant-wind boundary. For the binary merger progenitors, the rst two digit numbers give the ZAMS masses of the primary stars in solar masses, the following one-digit numbers refer to the ZAMS masses of the secondary stars in solar masses, and the last letter before the rst hyphen is related to the fraction of the He-shell mass dredged up. b The time to which the simulations were run. The models are scaled homologously from this time. c The effective metallicity dened as the photoabsorption opacity at 30keV (Section 2.3). d The mass-weighted average radial velocity of the fastest 1% of 56Ni. e The mass-weighted average enclosed mass coordinate of the fastest 1% of 56Ni. References. (1) Woosley et al. (1988), (2) Bruenn (1993), (3) Wongwathanarat et al. (2015), (4) M.Gabler et al. (2019, in preparation), (5) Nomoto & Hashimoto (1988), (6) Saio et al. (1988), (7) Shigeyama & Nomoto (1990), (8) Wongwathanarat et al. (2013), (9) Limongi et al. (2000), (10) Woosley & Weaver (1995), (11) Wongwathanarat et al. (2017), (12) Menon & Heger (2017), (13) Menon et al. (2019). nucleosynthesis (referred to as X, Section 2.2) by 0.5 relative to 56Ni, instead of 1.0, to remain consistent with the rest of this paper. The radial velocity of the fastest 56Ni is a simplied representation of the amount of mixing in the models. The enclosed mass coordinate of the fastest 56Ni should be related to the total ejecta mass (Mej) because of the importance of the amount of material outside of the fastest 56Ni (Section 6.1). The large range of fastest 56Ni velocities indicates that the set of explosion models span a large range of mixing properties. The reason for this has been explored for the B15, N20, L15, and W15 models (Wongwathanarat et al. 2015; Utrobin et al. 2019). The mixing in these models is the result of a complex interplay between the progenitor structure, dynamics of the SN shock, and propagation of the neutrino-heated ejecta. One factor that favors efcient mixing is the fast growth of Furthermore, a weak interaction of plumes with the strong reverse shock occurring below the He/H composition interface also enhances the amount of mixing. So far, however, studies have relied solely on a small number of single-star progenitor models. Detailed analysis of the merger models and comparisons with single-star models will be presented in a future paper (V. Utrobin et al. 2019, in Finally, we also include some comparisons with the 10HMM model (Pinto & Woosley 1988) as a reference. It was fairly successful at describing several observables of SN1987A and is representative of the extensive, but much more simplied, early work on the progenitor of SN1987A (see Section 2.2 of McCray 1993). The 10HMM model is 1D, and importantly, has additional mixing introduced by hand. Of particular relevance to the gamma-ray transfer are the spatial resolutions of the simulations and the asymmetries caused by the hydrodynamic instabilities. The late-time simulations were run on axis-free Yin-Yang grids (Kageyama & Sato 2004; Wongwathanarat et al. 2010) with a relative radial resolution better than 1% at all radii and an angular resolution of 2. For this study, the models are mapped from the Yin-Yang grids to spherical grids. The resolution of the spherical grids is sufcient to perform the mapping without loss of characteristic structures. The simulations provide no information on the small-scale mixing below the grid scale, but this does not affect the properties of the ejecta that are relevant for the gamma-ray propagation. The H-rich single-star models are evolved until 150days and the IIb model until 18days, beyond which they can be assumed to expand homologously (M. Gabler et al. 2019, in preparation). The merger models are only available at an age of 1day, from which we scale the models homologously. We check the effects of the late-time radioactive heating on the dynamics by comparing results from a version of the B15 model that has been expanded homologously from 1day to the standard B15 model that has been followed by simulations until 156days. The primary difference introduced by the late-time heating is increased mixing, leading to a flux increase of 20% for most cases, although it can reach 40% for the direct line emission at early times (<200 days). Homologous expansion is a reasonable approximation for a few thousand years (e.g., Truelove & McKee 1999), but this period of the evolution could be more than an order of magnitude shorter in extreme cases, such as SNeIIn and in the presence of the equatorial ring homologously inside of the reverse shock resulting from the interaction of the outermost ejecta with the CSM. During the rst 1000days of SN1987A, before interaction with the equatorial ring, all of the ejecta can safely be assumed to expand homologously. In fact, the central parts of the ejecta that contain the majority of the mass are still freely expanding at current epochs (Fransson et al. 2013). The explosion in all models sets in strongly asymmetrically as a consequence of hydrodynamic instabilities associated with the deposition of neutrino energy behind the stalled shock. This  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 b Reference for the lifetime. c Number of lines. From the Table of Isotopes (Firestone et al. 1999). d Line energies (Ei) and intensities (Ii) of the strongest (i = 1) and second strongest (i = 2) lines. From the Table of Isotopes (Firestone et al. 1999). e Including the positron-annihilation line at 511keV. References. (1) Firestone et al. (1999), (2) Junde (1992), (3) Junde (1999), (4) Junde et al. (2011), (5) Bhat (1992), (6) Bhat (1998). happens during the rst seconds of post-bounce evolution. These initial explosion asymmetries trigger the growth of secondary non-radial hydrodynamic instabilities after the shock crosses the compositionshell interfaces on its way out from the center to the surface of the exploding star. A more detailed description of the ejecta asymmetries can be found in Section 5 of Wongwathanarat et al. (2015) and Section 3.3 of Utrobin The nucleosynthesis is treated slightly differently in the different models. The nucleosynthesis in the SN1987A models was followed by a network of elements that includes 1H; the 13 nuclei from 4He to 56Ni; and a tracer nucleus X (Kifonidis et al. 2003; Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015). The tracer represents elements that were produced in grid cells where the electron fraction was below 0.49. Therefore, X comprises neutron-rich, Fe-group elements, but the simulations provide no additional information about the compositions. The net works used for the RSG and IIb models omit 32S, 36Ar, 48Cr, important nuclear decay data are provided in Table 2. We follow the decays 56Ni56Co56Fe (Clayton et al. 1969) and 57Co57Fe (Clayton 1974). The most important transition during the relevant time intervals in the current context is 56Co56Fe. The transition 57Co57Fe dominates below 100keV at epochs later than 800days for the H-rich models and 300days for the stripped IIb model. The contribution from the 44Ti44Sc44Ca chain is negligible during the time periods considered in this paper. Finally, the isotope 57Ni has a half-life of 36hr and is much less abundant than 56Ni. The contribution of 57Ni57Co is, therefore, always negligible. The true composition of X and the limited nuclear networks introduce uncertainties in the masses of individual isotopes. We compute the opacities based on the masses simulations, but rescale the escaping fluxes as if the masses of the radioactive sources match observations of SN1987A for all models. All 56Ni masses from the simulations are consistent, within the large uncertainties, with the 0.07 M of 56Ni produced by SN1987A (Suntzeff & Bouchet 1990; Bouchet et al. 1991). The spatial distribution of 56Ni is taken to be the distribution of the sum of the 56Ni explicitly followed by the grid weighted by 1 and the tracer X weighted by 0.5. We investigate the effect of this choice by comparing results based on weighing the tracer by 0 and 1. The flux level varies by less than 25% in most cases, the shapes of the spectra are practically unchanged, and light-curve peaks shift by less than 50days. We set the mass of 57Ni by adopting a xed ratio of the mass of 57Ni relative to that of 56Ni. The estimates of the 57Ni/56Ni ratio of SN1987A from explosive nucleosynthesis networks (Thielemann et al. 1990; Woosley & Hoffman 1991), direct observations (Syunyaev et al. 1990; Kurfess et al. 1992), and light-curve modeling (Fransson & Kozma 1993) favor values around twice the solar ratio, where the solar system 57Fe/56Fe number ratio is 0.023 (Lodders 2003). The spatial distribution of 57Ni is represented by the tracer X. For consistency and for facilitating comparisons, we scale the fluxes of all models to match the radioactive isotope yields of SN1987A. This puts the 56Ni masses of our RSG explosions around the 80th percentile of the distribution of inferred yields of ordinary SNeII-P (Kasen & Woosley 2009; Pejcha & Prieto 2015; Mller et al. 2017; Anderson 2019). In contrast, the 56Ni mass of our IIb model is at the 20th percentile of the inferred 56Ni masses of SNeIIb (Taddia et al. 2018; Anderson 2019), which peaks at roughly twice the 56Ni mass of The progenitor metallicity is important because it determines the composition of the outermost parts of the models that are not mixed with the freshly synthesized material. The envelope metallicity signicantly affects the emerging emission because the metals (primarily Fe) dominate the photoabsorption opacity in the relevant 10100keV range, even at metallicities that are much lower than the solar metallicity. Instead of using the standard denition of metallicity, we dene the effective metallicity (Zeff) as the photoabsorption opacity at 30keV. This is done because the abundance patterns of the different models are different and the photoabsorption opacity is the most important consequence of the metallicity in the current context. The effective metallicities of all models are provided in Table 1. It is worth pointing out that the effective metallicity of the . Relative to solar metallicity, this is slightly higher than what is typically adopted as the (standard) metallicity of the LMC. This is a result of Fe dominating the photoabsorption opacity above 6.4keV and that Fe is not as under-abundant as many of the intermediate-mass elements. The treatment of the metallicity in the stellar evolution the B15 and N20 progenitors has been  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Notes. The effective metallicity (see Section 2.3) of the LMC is 0.54 This is dominated by the difference in the Fe abundance of 0.24dex. The solar abundances are included for reference. a Number abundance of element El is represented by the astronomical log scale b Solar abundances from Table 1 of Lodders (2003). References. (1) Table 12 of Russell & Dopita (1990), (2) Table 5 of Kurt & Dufour (1998), (3) Russell & Bessell (1989), (4) Table 17 of Hunter et al. (2007), (5) Table 9 of Trundle et al. (2007), (6) Table 1 of Russell & fraction of each individual element signicantly simplied. Those nuclear networks were reduced by omitting the heavier metals and representing the metallicity using only lighter elements. We correct for this by raising the abundance in grid cells where the individual abundance is lower than the corresponding LMC value. Abundances are never lowered to match LMC abundances, which explains why Zeff, ) has marginally higher effective metallicity than the LMC (0.54 abundances inferred from the equatorial ring of SN1987A because this would require much larger changes to the models. See Section 6.1.3 for a discussion of using abundances inferred ring of SN1987A instead of LMC The adopted LMC abundances are provided in Table 3. The corrections are performed in regions where the H mass fraction is >0.1. The H mass fractions are slightly reduced to preserve the total masses. The total changes are approximately shifts of 0.1 M from H to metals, primarily intermediate-mass elements. We reiterate that only the B15 and N20 models require this modication. For example, the effective metallicity of the B15 model before correction is 0.03 that the RSGs, mergers, and IIb models are unmodied from their evolutionary compositions and have slightly lower effective metallicities (Table 1). We use early X-ray and gamma-ray observations of models. The comparisons can be divided into three categories; spectra, continuum light curves, and line fluxes. The observa tions of the line proles are investigated in a separate paper (A. Jerkstrand et al. 2019, in preparation). The distance to SN1987A is taken to be 51.2kpc (Panagia et al. 1991; Gould & Uza 1998; Panagia 1999; Mitchell et al. 2002) and when comparing simulations to observations, we correct the observed spectra for the recessional heliocentric velocity of the LMC of 287kms1 (Grningsson et al. 2008a, 2008b). The ISM absorption is negligible in the relevant energy range of 103500keV (e.g., Willingale et al. 2013; Frank An overview of all early hard X-ray and gamma-ray observations of SN1987A is provided in Table 4. Some of the early X-ray and gamma-ray observations have also been summarized by other authors (Bunner 1988; Gehrels et al. 1988; Leising 1991; Teegarden 1991; Tueller 1991; Wamsteker 1993). Below, we briefly describe the instruments and data used for our 3.1. The Roentgen Observatory The Roentgen Observatory was an experiment in the Kvant module of the space station Mir. The Kvant module carrying Roentgen docked to Mir during 1987 April and started observing SN1987A 168days after the outburst and continued to monitor SN1987A to later than 800days. We use data from the HEXE and the PulsarX-18 instruments. HEXE was the most sensitive instrument and provides relatively accurate continuum light curves in three energy bands in 15200keV (Syunyaev et al. 1990). Low-resolution spectra were also extracted for seven epochs. We also use spectra from PulsarX-1 at 320days (Syunyaev et al. 1988). The data are of signicantly lower quality and are primarily included with the purpose of verifying the HEXE spectra above 70keV during peak brightness, while also extending the The SMM was launched in 1980 and was a dedicated solar observatory. One of the seven instruments on board was the GRS, which operates in the energy range 0.38.5MeV (Forrest et al. 1980). The moderate energy resolution of around 50keV at 1MeV is insufcient for resolving the radioactive line proles. SMM was unable to point away from the Sun except for short durations, so SN1987A was observed as a part of the background emission while SMM performed solar observations. Because SMM was operational for 7 yr before SN1987A, it was possible to monitor the background gamma-ray flux before the explosion and then detect SN1987A as a change in the background level during its early evolution. We use data from SMM to constrain the evolution of the line fluxes. SMM provides the most accurate measurements of the line fluxes and also continuously monitored SN1987A throughout its early evolution. No emission from SN1987A was detected before 1987 July, but the 56Co decay lines rose rapidly during 150200days (Matz et al. 1988). The line emission peaked shortly thereafter, and then decayed beyond the detection threshold around day 600 (Leising & Share 8 Not to be confused with the bright X-ray source LMCX-1, which is located  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Early Hard X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Observations of SN1987A a The abbreviations and acronyms are: High Energy X-ray Experiment (HEXE), Gamma-Ray Spectrometer (GRS), Solar Maximum Mission (SMM ), Large Area Proportional Counter (LAC), Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Gamma-Ray Imaging Payload (GRIP), California Institute of Technology (CIT), Gamma-Ray Imaging Spectrometer (GRIS), Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque (SNLA), Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Gamma Ray Advanced Detector (GRAD), University of California, Riverside (UCR). References. (1) Sunyaev et al. (1987), (2) Syunyaev et al. (1987), (3) Syunyaev et al. (1988), (4) Syunyaev et al. (1989), (5) Syunyaev et al. (1990), (6) Sunyaev et al. (1991), (7) Forrest et al. (1980), (8) Matz et al. (1988), (9) Leising et al. (1989), (10) Leising & Share (1990), (11) Makino & ASTRO-C Team (1987), (12) Dotani et al. (1987), (13) Tanaka (1988), (14) Tanaka (1991), (15) Inoue et al. (1991), (16) Sandie et al. (1988b), (17) Sandie et al. (1988a), (18) Wilson et al. (1988), (19) Fishman et al. (1990), (20) Pendleton et al. (1995), (21) Althouse et al. (1985), (22) Cook et al. (1988), (23) Palmer et al. (1993), (24) Teegarden et al. (1989), (25) Tueller et al. (1990), (26) Tueller et al. (1991), (27) Tueller (1991), (28) Barthelmy et al. (1991), (29) Mahoney et al. (1988), (30) Rester et al. (1989), (31) Zych et al. (1983), (32) Simone et al. (1985), (33) Ait-Ouamer et al. (1992). The X-ray astronomy satellite Ginga (Galaxy) was launched on 1987 February 5 and started observing SN1987A 2 days after outburst and monitored SN1987A for more than 1000 days. The rst detection of emission from SN1987A was on day 131 (Dotani et al. 1987). Ginga carried three instruments, but only data from the LAC are used for this work. The LAC was a collimator and provided data on SN1987A in the 628keV range. Because of the relatively large collimator opening angle, the data might be contaminated by background sources (Inoue et al. 1991). For this reason, we choose to exclude data during an apparent flaring period in 1988 January. We use the Ginga light curves in the 616 and 1628keV ranges. For the presentations in this paper, we treat the two bands as spectral bins for the comparisons at specic times. The X-ray emission in the full 628keV range consists of two emission components (Tanaka 1988) and the energy cut at 16keV was chosen to optimally separate them from each other (Inoue et al. 1991). The signal-to-noise ratio in the low-energy band is low and the emission could be the result of interactions with the CSM or bremsstrahlung from the fast recoil electrons. This means that the low-energy band is not strictly comparable to our predictions but could be viewed as an upper limit. The represents the low-energy cutoff of the Comptonized radio active emission (Inoue et al. 1991; Tanaka 1991). The Ginga data agree reasonably well with the Roentgen/HEXE data in the overlapping energy range. 3.4. Balloon-borne Experiments We use data from a number of balloon-borne experiments, the details of which are summarized in Table 4. They provide independent measurements of the spectra (MSFC, GRIP), which agree well with the data from HEXE and PulsarX-1. This effectively also veries the continuum flux measurements of HEXE that are used to construct the continuum light curves. All of the balloon experiments that we include were able to measure line fluxes, which show reasonable agreement with the line flux evolution as observed by SMM (Figure 5 of Leising & Share 1990). Additionally, only balloon-borne experiments (GRIS, JPL, GRAD) carried instruments with sufcient energy resolution to resolve the line proles of 56Co (presented in A. Jerkstrand et al. 2019, in preparation). 4. Algorithm and Implementation We compute the X-ray and gamma-ray properties by following the propagation of Monte Carlo (MC) photons through the ejecta. The interactions we include are photo electric absorption, Compton scattering, and pair production. We do not compute bremsstrahlung or fluorescent emission because these effects only contribute signicantly at energies below the sharp photoabsorption cutoff around 15keV (Woosley et al. 1989; Clayton & The 1991; Burrows & van Riper 1995). We verify our code by comparing it to previously published spectra and light curves (Milne et al. 2004; The & Burrows 2014) of the W7 model (Nomoto et al. 1984), and by comparing the results from our code to those from HEIMDALL (Maeda et al. 2014) and SUMO-3D (A. Jerkstrand et al. 2019, We use i to denote random numbers uniformly distributed in the range of 01, where the index i distinguishes the different random numbers. Spatial vectors are denoted using boldface (e.g., a), and the Cartesian components are (ax, ay, az). The angle ranging from 02 , and the polar angle  is dened from 0 at the north pole to  at the south pole. Four vectors are denoted using Greek indices (e.g., b). We denote quantities in the SN frame without primes and quantities in frames locally comoving with the homologous expansion with primes.  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 In this section, we describe the cross sections used for Compton scattering, photoabsorption, and pair production. The absorption and scattering properties of the tracer X are set to We take the pair production cross sections from Ambwani & Sutherland (1988), which interpolate tabulated values of the cross sections (Hubbell 1969; Hubbell et al. 1980). The pair production cross sections are The Compton scattering cross section is given by the Klein Nishina formula (e.g., Rybicki & Lightman 1979). For computational stability and performance, we use an approx imate expression for the KleinNishina cross section (p. 319 of Pozdnyakov et al. 1983). The difference between the approx imation and the exact formula is less than 1% at all energies. The energy lost by a photon in each scattering in the rest frame of the electron is given by where Ef is the nal photon energy, Ei the initial photon energy, me the electron mass, and  the scattering angle. It shows the the fractional energy loss is much higher when the energy before scattering is comparable to, or higher than, the electron rest energy. 4.1.2. Photoelectric Absorption Photoabsorption cross sections are quickly declining func tions of energy E, which implies that photoabsorption is only relevant at relatively low X-ray energies. It starts becoming important around 100keV and dominates below 40keV for typical SN abundances (Alp et al. 2018). The non-relativistic high-energy asymptote is approximately proportional to E3. We use the cross sections of Verner et al. (1996). We note that the cross sections of Verner et al. (1996) are very similar to those of Verner & Yakovlev (1995) at energies above 10keV for the relevant isotopes, except for 4He. The photoabsorption cross section of 4He from Verner et al. (1996) is approximately 40% lower than the value of Verner & Yakovlev (1995) but the effect on the escaping fluxes is only approximately 1%. The cross sections of Verner et al. (1996) are also very similar to those of Veigele (1973).9 We include pair production primarily for comparisons with other codes (Milne et al. 2004). We have indeed veried that this effect has a negligible impact on the results for the models studied in this paper. For example, for 56Ni, the scattering cross section is 10 times higher than the pair production cross section at 3MeV, and they are approximately equal at 10MeV (see Figure 1 of Milne et al. 2004). Typically, less than 0.1% of the total photons are pair absorbed. where E6 is the photon energy in units of MeV and Z is the Gamma-ray photons are created by the decay of radioactive isotopes in the inner regions of the ejecta. Each MC photon is initially created by assigning a spatial position r, a direction of propagation W, and a photon energy. The initial spatial distribution is given by the spatial distribution of the parent nuclei in the models (Section 2.2). The direction of the photons are random in the rest frame of the homologously expanding parent nuclei, and the initial photon energies are the well-dened energies of the corresponding transitions. Impor tant data about the radioactive lines included in the code are provided in Table 2. With the energy E and the direction W, it is straightforward to construct to the SN frame. The result of accounting for the difference in reference frames is that the energies E are Doppler shifted and W slightly beamed in the outward direction. The effect on the result introduced by the beaming is an increase in escaping number flux of As the photon propagates through the ejecta, the optical where the scattering depth CS, photoabsorption depth ph, and pair production depth pp are given by where L is the path traveled by the photon, KN the Klein Nishina cross section, ne the electron number density, ph photoabsorption cross section, n the element number density, and the sums are taken over all elements I. The path is dened as the line starting from the position of the previous scattering, or the initial position if the photon has just been created. This integral is solved continuously as the photon travels through 9 In passing, we also note that the photoelectric cross sections of H and He have been switched in Table 3 of Hoeflich et al. (1992). 10 As noted by Swartz et al. (1995), the factor is supposed to be 0.10063, not 1.0063 as printed in Equation (2) of Ambwani & Sutherland (1988).  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 the ejecta by discretizing the continuous integral into a sum of nite dL. The discretization is chosen such that the distance dL is equal to 1% of the magnitude of the current radial position of the photon. It was veried that ner discretizations result in similar results and the spatial resolution is ultimately limited by the resolution of the models (see Section 2.1). A photon propagates until  reaches a limiting optical depth lim, which is sampled from the distribution At this point, one of the following three interactions occurs: the photon scatters off an electron, the photon is photoabsorbed, and the photon pair produces. In this subsection, we describe how the different interactions are treated numerically at the point of interaction. Scattering affects the photon energy and the direction of propagation, but does not destroy the photon; photoabsorption destroys the photon; and pair production destroys the photon and creates an electron positron pair. We assume that no positronium forms and that each positron is converted into a photon pair locally (Chugai et al. 1997; Ruiz-Lapuente & Spruit 1998; Jerkstrand et al. 2011). An interaction occurs when =lim. is fullled, the photon is absorbed. Absorption means that the photon is destroyed, and the program moves on by simulating the next MC photon. If Equation (8) is not fullled, but is fullled, the original photon is replaced by a pair of 511keV photons with random directions in the locally comoving frame. This represents pair production and subsequent annihilation. If neither condition is fullled, scattering occurs and a new direction and energy are computed. Both the new photon direction and energy are dependent on the velocity of the scattering electron. The electron velocities are taken to be the velocities given by the homologous expansion, implying that all electrons are moving radially outward. The effect of this compared to stationary electrons is an increase in escaping number flux of approximately 2%. We also veried that the thermal motion of electrons is unimportant compared to the bulk ejecta expansion in the situation under consideration, where temperatures are lower than 10,000K. The next step is to sample a new direction and energy for the photons after scattering. The distribution of the scattering angle frame is given by (e.g., Rybicki & where  is the solid angle. We note that this expression depends on the energy after scattering, which is given by Equation (1). The problem is to sample  from the distribution obtained by inserting Equation (1) into Equation (10). One possibility is to compute the cumulative distribution function of  numerically and then use the method of inverse functions (e.g., Section 9.1 of Pozdnyakov et al. 1983) to draw samples of  from Equation (10) using uniformly distributed random numbers. This requires a two dimensional lookup table of the cumulative distribution function as a function of Ei and . An alternative approach based on a rejection technique is presented in Section9.5 of Pozdnyakov et al. (1983), which is also summarized in AppendixD of Santana et al. (2016).11 We veried that both methods agree, and choose to implement the rejection algorithm. The output of our simulation is a list of photons that escape the SN. For each photon packet, we save the initial and nal energy; the direction of propagation; the number of scatterings; the time of the packet as measured by an observer at innity; and initial SN age when the packet was created by a radioactive decay. The initial time is used to weight the packet by the remaining mass of the radioactive parent nuclei at that time. This weight is equivalent to the number of photons represented by the packet. We note that we include the expansion of the ejecta while the photon is traveling. The effect of including live expansion of the ejecta is a decrease in escaping flux of approximately 1%, because while the photon is traveling outward, the ejecta also expand. The packet lists contain all information necessary to construct light curves and spectra during selected time intervals. It is also possible to investigate the light curves and spectra along different lines of sight. First, in Section 5.1, we present the effects of the ejecta asymmetries on the escaping X-ray and gamma-ray emission integrated over all energies, which are important for interpret ing the comparisons with the observed data of SN1987A. Then, we compare the models that attempt to match SN1987A (B15, N20, M15-7b, M16-7b, and 10HMM) with the observational data. Predictions from the B15 and M15-7b models show the best agreement with the observations. Therefore, we focus on these two models and provide more details on their asymmetries. The spectra are presented in Section 5.2, the continuum light curves in Section 5.3, and the line fluxes in Section 5.4. Lastly, we include spectra and line fluxes for the models that represent other types of SNe in Section 5.5 and investigate the effects of progenitor metallicity in Section 5.6. The line proles are investigated in a separate paper (A. Jerkstrand et al. 2019, in preparation). Error bars for the observational data correspond to 1 condence intervals. Exceptions are temporal error bars that represent the integration periods and spectral bins where the error bars represent the bin widths. Figure 1 shows spherical projections of the escape directions of the photons for the different models. All models primarily show variations on large angular scales, and the brightness is correlated with the center of mass of the 56Ni. Generally, the anisotropies are larger at early times. The temporal evolutions 11 We note that the plus sign in the expression for W f3, in Santana et al. (2016) should be a minus sign.  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 1. Spherical equal-area Hammer projections of the escaping photons at different times (for all energies). The left column shows the B15 model at three different times and the right column shows the N20, M15-7b, and W15 models at 300days. The points show the direction of the 56Ni center of mass (blue), minimum flux (orange), and maximum flux (green). The minimum and maximum directions are dened by the extremum number fluxes integrated over all energies and times up to 1000days. The numbers for the 56Ni centers of mass are the radial velocities in units ofkms1. The distributions for narrow energy intervals are similar to the integrated distributions. The flux asymmetries are initially larger and slowly decrease as the ejecta dilute. The main difference is the difference in amplitude of the flux asymmetries, which reflects the different levels of ejecta asymmetries in the models. of all models are relatively similar and projections in narrow energy ranges show similar features. The main differences in asymmetries are lower for low-energy photons, which have scattered many times, while the asymmetries are strongest for the line photons that escape directly (Sections 5.2 and 5.4). The asymmetric, whereas M15-7b is the most asymmetric model. The models that are not shown (L15, M16-7b, and IIb) show similar emission asymmetry properties. The flux ratio along the maximum to minimum direction is 1.7 for L15 at 300days, 4 for M16-7b at 300days, and 2.1 for IIb at 100days. In what follows, we investigate quantities averaged over all directions, as well as along the directions of minimum and maximum flux. The angle-averaged properties are a good the distribution of properties over all  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 2. Spectra from the B15 and M15-7b models at 300days (left) and direction-averaged spectra from all SN1987A models (right). Observations of SN1987A (crosses); HEXE at 320days (black, Syunyaev et al. 1990), Ginga at 300days (gray, Inoue et al. 1991), MSFC at 248days (brown, Pendleton et al. 1995), PulsarX-1 at 320days (pink, Syunyaev et al. 1990), and GRIP at 268days (yellow, Palmer et al. 1993). In the left panel, the solid lines are the spectra averaged over all directions, the semitransparent dashed lines are along the directions of minimum flux, and the semitransparent dasheddotted lines are along the directions of maximum flux. The envelope metallicity, which sets the low-energy cutoff, of the 10HMM model is not well dened because metals were articially mixed into parts of the envelope (Sections 2 and 5.6). Figure 3. Light curves in the 45105keV range from the B15 and M15-7b models (left), direction-averaged 45105keV light curves from all SN1987A models (right), and HEXE SN1987A observations (black crosses). The horizontal bars of the data points at 145days and 445days are not visible because of the short exposures. In the left panel, the solid lines are averaged over all directions, the semitransparent dashed lines are along the directions of minimum flux, and the semitransparent dasheddotted lines are along the directions of maximum flux. quantities are useful, although no real observer is able to measure them. The angle-averaged properties also do not require arbitrary choices of viewing angles and are less sensitive to MC noise. Because of the directional variations are negligible on small angular scales, we use half-opening angles of 30 when computing quantities along certain directions. The extremum directions are dened by the extremum number fluxes integrated over all energies and all The left panel of Figure 2 shows the averaged and directional spectra for the B15 and M15-7b models at 300days and the corresponding observational data. At 300days, both the shapes and the amplitudes are in reasonable agreement with the data, and any remaining deviations between models and observa tions can relatively easily be accommodated by the variance introduced by the asymmetries. An important property is that the asymmetries change the overall normalizations, but does not affect the shapes much. The typical amplitude of the flux variations for different viewing angles spans a factor of 2, but the most asymmetric model, M15-7b, shows variations up to a The right panel of Figure 2 compares all spectra of the SN1987A models with observational data around 300days. We use the direction-averaged spectra and simply note that variations of a factor of a few in amplitude are possible because of asymmetries, in particular at early times (Section 6.1.1). The N20 model matches the observed spectra well but is only doing  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 4. Temporal evolution of the sum of the 847 and 1238keV line fluxes from the B15 and M15-7b models (left) and direction-averaged fluxes from all SN1987A models (right). The colored solid lines that are included in the legend are direction-averaged model predictions, and the gray curve is the analytic limit of free escape for 0.07 M of initial 56Ni (Suntzeff & Bouchet 1990; Bouchet et al. 1991). The semitransparent dashed lines are along the minimum flux directions and the dasheddotted lines are along the maximum flux directions of the B15 and M15-7b models. The black crosses are SMM measurements. The gray markers are the balloon measurements; MSFC (triangle, Sandie et al. 1988b), GRIP (squares, Palmer et al. 1993), GRIS (circles, Tueller 1991), JPL (star, Mahoney et al. 1988), GRAD (, Rester et al. 1989), and UCR (diamond, Ait-Ouamer et al. 1992). so around 300days (Section 5.3). The 1D model 10HMM also agrees relatively well with the observations, but this required mixing introduced by hand (Section 2). This shows that 3D models are able to self-consistently produce mixing at levels similar to what is inferred from observations, whereas this had to be introduced articially in 1D models. The M16-7b model (red line toward the bottom of Figure 2 right) clearly fails to match the observations. We reiterate (Section 2) that M15-7b and M16-7b are presented here because they t the X-ray and gamma-ray observations best and worst, respectively, out of the six merger progenitors that fulll the observational criteria of the SN 1987A progenitor (Menon & Heger 2017). Out of the remaining four merger models (not shown), M15-8b and M17-7a are very similar to M16-7b, whereas M16-4a and M17-8b are intermediate cases. Only M15-7b agrees reasonably well with the X-ray and gamma-ray observations, whereas the remaining ve merger The light curves in different energy bands show similar results, but we focus on the 45105keV observations by HEXE because they are the most accurate. The left panel of Figure 3 shows the averaged and directional light curves for the B15 and M15-7b models in the 45105keV range and the corresponding HEXE data. The asymmetries clearly affect the flux magnitude and the time of the initial rise. In contrast, the declining tails are relatively similar along different directions. This is a manifestation of the emission asymmetries becoming less pronounced at later times. The average 45105keV light curves for all models and the HEXE observations are shown in the right panel of Figure 3. None of the models is able to match the early observed breakout time and all overshoot the light curve at later times (except for M16-7b, which completely fails to match the observations). The general agreement with observations, however, can still be considered acceptable given the uncertainties and sensitivity of the emission properties on the progenitor structure (Section 6.2). the SN1987A-like models. For Figure 4 shows the line fluxes of the sum of the 847 and observations that only covered one of the lines, we scale that value by the atomic line yields to obtain the expected combined flux under the assumption of equal optical depths at 847 and 1238keV. There is possibly a slight indication that the SMM measures lower fluxes than the balloon-borne experiments (Leising 1991; Teegarden 1994). For the comparisons with model predictions, we primarily focus on the SMM values the continuous coverage and homogeneity of The predicted line fluxes show the same breakout problem as the continuum light curves. The line flux is more sensitive to the viewing angle than the continuum emission in the sense that the relative differences in flux are larger. This is because the continuum photons have scattered into new directions before escaping the ejecta, which effectively reduces the strength of the asymmetries. Apart from this, the viewing asymmetric models, similarly as for curves. The accuracy of the observed line data is not as good as the continuum precision. However, the line fluxes are only functions of the optical depth along the photon path, which makes them valuable for breaking degeneracies when inter preting the more complex continuum data (Section 6.2). We include predictions for other types of SNe as a guide for future observations. We reiterate that radioactive elements in all models are scaled to the inferred values of SN1987A (Section 2.2). Figure 5 shows the spectra  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 5. Direction-averaged spectra of the RSG models L15 and W15 at 300days, and the stripped IIb model at 100days. The gray line is the B15 model at 300days and is included for reference. The times are chosen to be around peak flux. The variations along different directions primarily affect the magnitude of the flux while the shape remains relatively constant (Figure 2). The differences at the low-energy cutoff are primarily attributed to the different metallicities (Table 1 and Section 5.6). Figure 6. Temporal evolution of the 847keV line fluxes (not the sum of the 847 and 1238 keV lines as in Figure 4) of the RSG models L15 and W15, and the stripped IIb model. The gray line is the direction-averaged line flux from the B15 model, which is included for reference. The semitransparent dashed the flux along the minimum direction and the semitransparent dasheddotted lines the flux along the maximum direction for the corresponding models. of the RSG models L15 and W15, as well as the stripped IIb model. We note that the H-rich models are shown at 300days, whereas the IIb model is at 100days. This roughly corresponds to the times of peak flux. The spectral shape for a given model is softer at earlier times and harder at later times. We note that the RSG models are similar to the B15 model. Figure 6 shows the 847keV line fluxes of the L15, W15, and IIb models. We also include the light curves along the extremum directions. The variations due to asymmetries are flux variations by a factor of a few, but properties of the line fluxes are independent of the viewing The most notable features of the IIb model are that it evolves faster and is more luminous at the time of peak flux than the H-rich models. This is because of the lower ejecta mass and higher expansion velocities. Furthermore, photoabsorption cutoff to slightly higher energies, because the core is revealed and a larger fraction of the photons escape the ejecta before being scattered many times. 5.6. Effects of Progenitor Metallicity In this subsection, we use ve versions of the B15 model to investigate the effects of different progenitor envelope In addition to the B15 version with LMC Zeff, ), we generate three additional versions of B15 with effective metallicities of 0.12, 0.27, and . These three versions are corrected using solar following the method presented in Section 2.3. Lastly, we create a fth version with abundances corresponding to the ring of SN1987A (Section 6.1.3), which results in an effective metallicity of 0.28 Figure 7 shows spectra at 300days for the ve different B15 models. This clearly shows how increasing metallicity shifts the low-energy cutoff of the spectra to higher energies by increasing the photoelectric absorption opacity. The observed SN1987A spectra seem to align particularly well with the version with LMC metallicity, but line is for LMC abundances and the purple 0.28 Figure 7. Spectra at 300days for the B15 model at ve different metallicities. This shows how increasing metallicity (primarily Fe abundance) of the progenitor envelope affects the low-energy photoabsorption cutoff. The green abundances of the ring of SN1987A. The purple line deviates at higher energies because of a much higher He-to-H ratio (Section 6.1.3), which changes the Compton scattering opacity. Overplotted are the observed HEXE spectrum at 320days (black crosses), and the Ginga bands at 300days (gray abundances inferred from the ring of SN 1987A. The four versions that are practically identical at higher energies have almost the same Compton scattering opacity. This is because the metallicity corrections only involve minor changes in terms of mass, which only marginally affect the scattering opacity. The reason why the version with the SN1987A ring abundances differs at higher energies is because of a major shift of 2.1 M of H into He (Section 6.1.3). This reduces the electron density and signicantly decreases the scattering opacity. However, the cutoff is still at an energy similar to that of the version with 0.27  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 8. Light curves in the 45105keV range along different viewing angles for the B15 model (left) and the M15-7b model (right). The solid black lines are averaged over all directions, the dashed black lines are along the directions of minimum flux, and the dasheddotted black lines are along the directions of maximum flux. The colored lines are along 20 arbitrary uniformly distributed directions (the vertices of a dodecahedron). 6.1. General Model Emission Properties Before comparing the predictions with the SN1987A observations (Section 6.2), we discuss some general properties of the predicted emission. The X-ray and gamma-ray emission from different progenitors shows different properties. For a electron column density outside of the fastest 56Ni, or in other words, the amount of mixing (Section 2). This determines the time at which the rst emission starts escaping the ejecta. An additional major difference between the models is that the stripped IIb model evolves on shorter timescales and is more luminous than the H-rich models because of its lower ejecta mass and higher explosion velocities. 6.1.1. Variance due to Asymmetries First, we explore the effects of the choice of viewing angle on the observed properties. This is the variance introduced by the 3D structures for a given explosion. The variance arising from the stochastic hydrodynamic instabilities for repeated explosions of the same progenitor is investigated in Section 6.1.2. We show the light curves in the 45105keV range for the B15 and M15-7b models along different viewing angles in Figure 8. The effects of the asymmetries are overall changes in amplitudes and shapes of the light curves. This is more asymmetric model. The shapes of the spectra, however, are only weakly affected (Figure 2). The general behavior of the spectral shapes along different directions is larger differences at higher energies, particularly for the direct line emission, than at lower energies. This is because the scattering effectively smooths out the asymmetries. This also implies that the line fluxes are more strongly affected by asymmetries than the 45105keV light curves. The peak line flux varies along different directions by more than a factor of 5 in B15 and 10 in M15-7b, and the times of peak line flux differ by up to 100days in B15 and 300days in M15-7b between the minimum and maximum directions. Finally, Figure 8 clearly shows that the range of fluxes spanned by the fluxes along the minimum and maximum directions contains the fluxes from practically all directions at the distribution of properties over all 6.1.2. Variance due to Explosion Dynamics The variance introduced by the stochastic hydrodynamic evolution is seeded by the random fluctuations in the structures (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013). We investigate the effects on the emission properties by simulating three additional explosions of the M15-7b model. The rst explosion differs by having different seed perturbations in the mapping from the 1D progenitor into three dimensions. The nal explosion energy of this second model is 1.441051 erg. The two other explosions were simulated with different seed perturbations and slightly different neutrino luminosities. They result in explosion energies of 1.401051 and 1.761051 erg. A similar exercise was carried out using optical light curves for three versions of the B15 model by Utrobin et al. The 45105keV light curves for the four versions of M15 7b are shown in Figure 9 (left). In addition to the variance due to asymmetries of the individual models, the 45105keV continuum varies within 30% and the peak time shifts by up to 100days. This means that the light-curve shapes are slightly different. The line fluxes (Figure 9, right) show similar variance as the continua, with the primary difference being that the angle-averaged line flux peaks span a factor of 2. For M15-7b, the differences in spectral shape resulting from the stochastic nature of the explosion are much smaller than the variance due to the intrinsic asymmetries. Finally, B15 and M15-7b can still be distinguished, despite the broad distributions of properties due to both the stochasticity of the explosions and intrinsic asymmetries (Figures 8 and 9).  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 9. Light curves in the 45105keV range (left) and the sum of the 847 and 1238keV line fluxes (right) from four versions of the M15-7b model with different explosion energies and seed perturbations. The orange lines are the reference M15-7b, which we focus on throughout the rest of the paper. The solid lines are averaged over all directions, the semitransparent dashed lines are along the directions of minimum flux, and the semitransparent dasheddotted lines are along the directions of 6.1.3. Progenitor Metallicity The progenitor surface metallicity also has interesting implications for the X-ray properties. Increasing progenitor metallicity shifts the low-energy X-ray cutoff to higher energies (Figure 7). This effect could potentially be used to constrain the progenitor metallicity and has previously been discussed in the context of SNeIa (Maeda et al. 2012). The cutoff is also not very sensitive to the viewing angle (Figure 2) because it is determined by the properties of the outermost layers of the ejecta, which are more isotropic. On the other hand, if the homogeneity of the outer envelope is broken by large-scale convection (e.g., Hoflich 1991), it is likely that the low-energy cutoff would be less sharp, which would make it more difcult to constrain the metallicity. Inversely, this could also serve as a diagnostic of the envelope isotropy. It is important to point out that the cutoff is only dependent on the envelope metallicity when the low-energy limit is set by photoabsorption. This is the case in the early phases during the X-ray rise. At times later than the X-ray flux peak, the escaping emission is dominated by radiation from the deeper parts where the mean atomic number is higher and photoelectric cross sections are larger. Another contributing factor (especially at very late times) is that the low-energy cutoff is determined by the ability of the ejecta to trap photons, which determines how many times photons scatter and lose energy before they escape. In Section 2.3, we describe the metallicity corrections for the B15 and N20 models to LMC abundances (Table 3). An alternative is to use the abundances of the SN1987A progenitor inferred from observations of the equatorial ring. We check the effects on the results by comparing the B15 model with LMC abundances (that is used throughout the rest of the paper) to a B15 version with SN1987A abundances. The 45105keV light curves of these models are shown in Figure 10. The line fluxes behave in a similar way. The differences are primarily driven by the increase of the of He abundance to 11.31 (0.21 relative to H by number; Lundqvist & Fransson 1996; Mattila et al. 2010) and the decrease of the Fe abundance to 6.98 (9.6106 relative to H by number, Dewey et al. 2008, 2012; Zhekov et al. 2009; Mattila et al. 2010). Both changes contribute to lowering the Figure 10. Light curves in the 45105keV range for the standard B15 version with LMC abundances (blue) and a modied B15 version with SN1987A abundances (orange). The solid lines are averaged over all directions, the semitransparent dashed lines are along the directions of minimum flux, and the semitransparent dasheddotted lines are along the directions of maximum flux. effective metallicity to 0.28 , and consequently, shift the photoabsorption cutoff to lower energies (Figure 7).12 The inferred SN1987A progenitor He abundance is more than twice as high as the LMC abundance (Table 3). This requires a conversion of 2.1 M of H into He in the envelope, which is a much more drastic change to the progenitor than the correction to LMC abundances. The H-to-He change lowers the scattering opacity because of the lower number of electrons per unit mass, which in turn leads to an earlier time of rise and a higher peak 12 The conversion of H to He does not directly lower the effective metallicity (in fact, the effective metallicity increases slightly). However, this indirectly lowers the abundances of the metals, which dominate the photoabsorption opacity, because we adopt values of all elements relative to H. Thus, the net effect is a decrease of the effective metallicity.  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 asymmetries of the B15 model. the differences are smaller than the intrinsic 6.2. Comparisons with SN1987A The predictions of the B15 and M15-7b models (along the maximum direction) capture the general observed data relatively well. There are, however, some signicant differences that have constraining implications for the models. The other SN1987A models are worse at reproducing the observations, primarily because of insufcient mixing of the 56Ni to the outer layers (Table 1). The amount of mixing depends on the properties of the progenitor in a complex way and cannot be directly inferred from basic progenitor or explosion parameters (Section 2). Understanding this complex relation requires a more detailed analysis and evaluation of the growth rates of RayleighTaylor instabilities for each of the models. This has been investigated for the H-rich single-star progenitors (Wongwathanarat et al. 2015; Utrobin et al. 2019), and both single stars and mergers will be presented in a forthcoming paper (V. Utrobin et al. 2019, in preparation). We do not discuss N20, M16-7b, or the other merger models (not presented) further since they all fail to Focusing on B15 and M15-7b, we investigate what can be inferred from the remaining differences between the model predictions and the observations. The property that is easiest to interpret is the line flux. At early times during the rising phase, this practically only depends on the column density of electrons outside the fastest trace amounts of 56Ni on the near side. In contrast, at later times when the line fluxes are declining, they are practically only a function of the average absorption through the ejecta to the bulk of the 56Ni. It is clear from Figure 4 that the line fluxes of all models fail to capture the early observed rise before 200days and the fast decline after 400days. The early-time observations most likely imply that trace amounts of 56Ni were ejected toward us at slightly higher velocities (more strictly, higher mass coordinate) than what is seen in the models. The only other (less likely) option is that there is a thinner hole through the envelope that allows some emission from deeper regions to escape at early times. The late time line observations imply that there is more material that absorbs the direct emission than predicted by the models. This can be achieved by either larger total ejecta masses or the 56Ni being preferentially ejected toward the far side away from us. The line fluxes are closely related to the continuum light curves. The main difference is that the continuum light curves depend nontrivially on the optical depths to the radioactive elements. For example, the continuum emission is quenched for very high absorption, as well as when approaching the optically thin regime, because the continuum requires down scattering of line photons. In conjunction with the observations of the direct is straightforward to break this 45105keV light curves fail to reach the early observed fluxes before 200days and overshoot the observed values at times later than 400days, similarly to the line fluxes. This results in the same constraints on the distribution of 56Ni as discussed above, but is still helpful because the continuum data are more accurate and also provide additional independent observations. The model spectra at 300days in Figure 2 agree very well with observations. However, the same early decits and late excesses that are seen in the continuum light curves (Figure 3) are of course also present in the spectra at early and late times (not shown). The difference between predicted spectra and observations at these times is primarily a change in normal ization, which also implies that the continuum light curves in other energy bands show similar trends as in the presented 45105keV range. A notable feature in the spectra is the low energy cutoff. It can be seen in the right panel of Figure 2 that the SN1987A models match the spectral break around 20keV. This is simply a manifestation of the metallicities of the progenitor envelopes (Section 5.6), which are consistent with Finally, we stress two points concerning the magnitude of the discrepancies between the predictions and the observations. First, even though the rise of the predicted light curves are too late (left panels of Figures 3 and 4), the relative difference in maximum 56Ni velocity required to match data is relatively low. We nd that articially increasing the radial velocity of all 56Ni by around 20% in the B15 model is sufcient for the direction-averaged emission to match both the low-energy continuum and line flux rise. Second, the difference by a factor of 2 in the direct line flux around 600days (Figure 4) can be remedied by shifting the 56Ni center of mass. The relevant quantity is the effective optical depth, and by comparing with the free-escape asymptote in Figure 4, it is clear that only a slight increase in the optical depth is sufcient for models to match data. We make another toy model by taking the original B15 model and moving the 56Ni center of mass from 214514kms1 along the same direction. This is done by applying a constant shift to all 56Ni, effectively moving the distribution as a rigid body within the rest of the ejecta. This results in a relatively good match with observations at late times. It is only meaningful to view this model from the minimum direction because a natural consequence of the modication is that the opposite direction matches the data worse. The increased radial velocity and the center-of-mass shift of the 56Ni distribution only marginally affect the spectral shape. It is also worth pointing out that the aforementioned example of increased mixing and center-of mass shift is only one of many possibilities to match the data due to the large freedom when modifying 3D structures We make simple predictions for observations of future nearby SNe by comparing our results with the sensitivity of current telescopes. The Chandra X-Ray Observatory (Weisskopf et al. 2000, 2002; Garmire et al. 2003) covers soft X-rays below 10 keV, NuSTAR covers the 379keV range (Harrison et al. 2013; Madsen et al. 2015), and the SPectrometer on INTEGRAL (SPI; Vedrenne et al. 2003) on board the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL; Winkler et al. 2003) extends from 20keV to 8MeV. Even though the effective area of XMM-Newton (Jansen et al. 2001; Strder et al. 2001; Turner et al. 2001) is larger than the effective area of Chandra, their point-source sensitivities are similar (Figure 6 of Takahashi et al. 2010). For reference, we also include the sensitivity curve of e-ASTROGAM (De Angelis et al. 2017), which was a candidate mission for the ESA M5 call and was proposed to operate from For the predictions, we choose a specic set of three non stripped models and the stripped-envelope IIb model. The B15 version used for these predictions is without the metallicity  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Figure 11. Comparison of predicted continua scaled to 3Mpc with the detection instruments: Chandra (dotted black line, Takahashi et al. 2010), NuSTAR (dashed black line, Koglin et al. 2005), INTEGRAL (solid black line, Roques et al. 2003), and the ESA M5 proposal e-ASTROGAM (dasheddotted black line, De Angelis et al. 2017). The spectra are at a time of 300days for the non-stripped models and 100 days for the IIb model, which are approximately the times of peak flux in the NuSTAR band. All continuum sensitivities are given for spectral bins of E/E=0.5, a detection threshold of 3, and an exposure time of 1Ms. correction described in Section 2.3, which means that effective metallicity is 0.03 Zeff, using solar abundances. In contrast, the metallicity of the L15 and the IIb models are unmodied from their standard values provided in Table 1. We construct this set of models to illustrate the effects of different metallicities because of its importance for the low-energy cutoff. The effects of the metallicity on the direct line fluxes are negligible. Figure 11 shows predicted spectra overplotted on the sensitivity curves of the instruments. NuSTAR is expected to provide the deepest observations. The non-stripped models are relatively similar and are expected to be detectable by NuSTAR to around 3Mpc, whereas the limiting distance for the IIb model is around 10Mpc. This is in agreement with the value of 4Mpc given by Harrison et al. (2013) for CCSNe in general. These distances extend to slightly beyond the Local Group. It is worth pointing out that the low-metallicity version of B15 has the photoabsorption cutoff above the Chandra range (our code does not include the much fainter bremsstrahlung component at lower energies, Section 4). This means that even metal-free progenitors do not extend into the soft X-ray regime <10 keV. Figure 12 shows the computed 847keV line light curves and the narrow-line sensitivities of INTEGRAL and e-ASTROGAM . It is clear that INTEGRAL is only capable of detecting the 847keV line out to around 200kpc for the non-stripped SNe. This effectively limits the range to within the Milky Way and its satellites. Stripped-envelope SNe are expected to be to 2Mpc, which covers the Local Group. e-ASTROGAM should expand the horizon by a factor of three, which would increase the number of potential targets by a The expected CCSN rate is around 0.1 per year within 3Mpc and 1 per year within 10Mpc (Arnaud et al. 2004; Ando et al. 2005; Botticella et al. 2012; Horiuchi et al. 2013; Xiao & Eldridge 2015). Inferred rates based on galaxy properties and Figure 12. The 847keV line light curves scaled to 200kpc overplotted on the detection sensitivities of INTEGRAL/SPI (solid black line, Roques et al. 2003) and the ESA M5 proposal e-ASTROGAM (dasheddotted black line, De Angelis et al. 2017). The sensitivities are given for a detection threshold of 3 and an exposure time of 1Ms. star formation models are associated with uncertainties. Optical surveys, however, are possibly also incomplete by 20% even within 10Mpc (Prieto et al. 2012; Jencson et al. 2017, 2018; Tartaglia et al. 2018). The fraction of stripped-envelope SNe is estimated to be in the range 0.250.35, with reasonable agreement between estimates based on local SNe observed over the past decades (Botticella et al. 2012; Mattila et al. 2012; Horiuchi et al. 2013; Xiao & Eldridge 2015) and surveys of larger volumes (Smartt et al. 2009; Arcavi et al. 2010; Li et al. 2011; Smith et al. 2011). Thus, a reasonable estimate is that a CCSN should be detectable by NuSTAR every 3 yr, and the most likely candidates are stripped-envelope SNe. Finally, we stress that simply comparing predicted spectra with sensitivity curves only provides a very rough estimate of what can be detected. include detailed instrumental effects and realistic backgrounds will be the subject of future studies. We use SN models based on 3D neutrino-driven explosion simulations (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013, 2015, 2017, M. Gabler et al. 2019, in preparation) to compute the expected early X-ray and gamma-ray emission. Four of the models are designed to represent SN1987A; two of these are single-star BSGs and two are the results of mergers. We compare predictions from these models to observations of SN1987A to constrain the model properties. Additionally, we investigate models of two single-star RSGs and a stripped-envelope IIb model to extend the results to other types of CCSNe that are more common than SN1987A-like events. Our main conclu 1. The overall agreement between observations and model mechanism is able to produce SN explosions that are basically consistent with the X-ray and gamma-ray observations. General features are well reproduced, such as the normalization, spectral shape, and shape of the light curves. We stress that these models are based on realistic simulations of the progenitors and SN explosions.  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 2. Both the single-star progenitor B15 and the merger model M15-7b are capable of reproducing the most relevant observational X-ray and gamma-ray properties of out of the six merger models of Menon & Heger (2017) that is able to match the main features of the observations. Similarly, the single-star model N20 can be excluded. The primary reason for failing to match the observations is insufcient mixing of 56Ni to the outer layers, which related to the growth rates of RayleighTaylor instabilities during the explosions et al. 2015; Utrobin et al. 2019, V. Utrobin et al. 2019, in preparation). This also highlights that X-ray and gamma-ray observations are a powerful way of con 3. On a more detailed level, there are differences in the temporal evolution of the continuum and line fluxes between the 3D explosion models and SN1987A observations. A suitable choice of viewing angle is not sufcient to reconcile these shortcomings. The differ ences can, however, be remedied by relatively small changes to the explosion dynamics. Thus, we do not consider these discrepancies to be critical issues in the provide further insight to rene the progenitor models. For example, relative to the B15 model, it is sufcient to increase the velocity of the fastest trace amounts of 56Ni on the near side by 20%, while the bulk of the 56Ni is redshifted by 500kms1 instead of 200kms1. This is only one possible explanation, which illustrates that relatively small changes to the explosion dynamics and progenitor structures are needed, especially consider ing the sensitivity of the dynamics to the progenitor structure. This issue will be further discussed in a follow up paper by A.Jerkstrand et al. (2019, in preparation). 4. The low-energy spectral cutoff is determined by the around 30keV. In our explosion models, the outer parts of the envelopes are relatively spherical, which means that the low-energy X-ray cutoff is insensitive to viewing angle. This is potentially a direct way of observationally constraining the composition of SN progenitors. The observations of SN1987A are only weakly constraining, the metallicity of its progenitor is consistent with both the metallicity of the LMC as well as the metallicity of its equatorial ring. 5. The asymmetries and 3D structures introduce a viewing angle dependence, which primarily affects the overall flux normalization. For the more asymmetric models, the shapes of the light curves also change signicantly for different viewing angles. The shapes of the spectra, however, remain relatively unaffected. The magnitude of these effects varies signicantly depending on the level of ejecta asymmetries, epoch, and energy range considered. 6. The most important properties that affect the nature of the X-ray and gamma-ray emission are the amount of 56Ni mixing and the level of asymmetry. Aside from this, qualitatively similar progenitor models produce relatively similar X-ray and gamma-ray emission. The X-ray and gamma-ray emission of the stripped-envelope IIb model evolves faster and is more than an order of magnitude more luminous than the non-stripped models. 7. NuSTAR offers the best prospects of future observations of early X-ray continuum emission from nearby SNe. detecting non-stripped SNe within 3Mpc and stripped to 10Mpc, which extends to the nearest galaxies beyond the Local Group. This corre sponds to an expected detection rate of 1 CCSN every 3 yr. The deepest observations of direct instruments are provided by INT EGRAL/SPI. It is expected to cover non-stripped SNe in the Milky Way and its satellites, and reach stripped SNe at 2Mpc, which is comparable to the extent of the Local We thank Markus Kromer, Lih-Sin The, and Peter Milne for providing the W7 model (Nomoto et al. 1984), and Stan Woosley for providing the 10HMM model (Pinto & Woos ley 1988). This research was funded by the Knut & Alice Wallenberg foundation. K. M. acknowledges support by JSPS KAKENHI grant (18H04585, 18H05223, 17H02864). The simulations were in part carried out on Cray XC30/XC50 at the Center for Computational Astrophysics, National Astro nomical Observatory of Japan. At Garching, this project was supported by the European Research Council through grant ERC-AdG No. 341157-COCO2CASA, and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through Sonderforschungbereich SFB 1258 Neutrinos and Dark Matter in Astro- and Particle Physics (NDM) and the Excellence Cluster Universe (EXC 153;http://www.universe-cluster.de/). The 3D explosion modeling was performed using the draco and cobra clusters at the Max Planck Computing and Data Facility (MPCDF). A. H. has been supported, in part, by a grant from Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (Grant No. 16DZ2260200) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11655002), and by the Australian Research Council through a Future Fellowship (FT120100363). This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Data System. Facilities: SMM (GRS), Ginga (LAC). Software: astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013), FTOOLS (Blackburn 1995), h5py (Collette 2013), HEAsoft (NASA High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (HEASARC), 2014), matplotlib (Hunter 2007), numpy (Jones et al. 2001; van der Walt et al. 2011), PROMETHEUS (Fryxell et al. 1991; Mller et al. 1991), PROMETHEUS-HOTB (Wongwathanarat et al. 2010; M. Gabler et al. 2019, in preparation), PROMETHEUS-VERTEX (Rampp & Janka 2002; Buras et al. 2006), SAOImage DS9 (Joye & Mandel 2003), scipy (Jones et al. 2001). https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0427-5592 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0065-2933 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2611-7269 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8532-3594 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1663-4513 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8005-4030 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3684-1325 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4234-4181  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Ait-Ouamer, F., Kerrick, A. D., ONeill, T. J., et al. 1992, ApJ, 386, 715 Alp, D., Larsson, J., Fransson, C., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864, 175 Althouse, W. E., Cook, W. R., Cummings, A. C., et al. 1985, Proc. ICRC, Ambwani, K., & Sutherland, P. 1988, ApJ, 325, 820 Anderson, J. P. 2019, A&A, 628, A7 Ando, S., Beacom, J. F., & Yksel, H. 2005, PhRvL, 95, 171101 Arcavi, I., Gal-Yam, A., Kasliwal, M. M., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721, 777 Arnaud, N., Barsuglia, M., Bizouard, M.-A., et al. 2004, APh, 21, 201 Arnett, W. D. 1966, CaJPh, 44, 2553 Arnett, W. D., Bahcall, J. N., Kirshner, R. P., & Woosley, S. E. 1989, Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, Baade, W., & Zwicky, F. 1934, PNAS, 20, 259 Barthelmy, S., Gehrels, N., Teegarden, B. J., et al. 1991, in AIP Conf. Ser. 232, Gamma-Ray Line Astrophysics, ed. P. Durouchoux & N. Prantzos Bethe, H. A. 1990, RvMP, 62, 801 Bethe, H. A., & Pizzochero, P. 1990, ApJL, 350, L33 Bethe, H. A., & Wilson, J. R. 1985, ApJ, 295, 14 Bhat, M. R. 1992, NDS, 67, 195 Bhat, M. R. 1998, NDS, 85, 415 Blackburn, J. K. 1995, in ASP Conf. Ser. 77, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, ed. R. A. Shaw, H. E. Payne, & J. J. E. Hayes (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 367 Blinnikov, S., Lundqvist, P., Bartunov, O., Nomoto, K., & Iwamoto, K. 2000, Botticella, M. T., Smartt, S. J., Kennicutt, R. C., et al. 2012, A&A, 537, A132 Bouchet, P., Phillips, M. M., Suntzeff, N. B., et al. 1991, A&A, 245, 490 Bruenn, S. W. 1985, ApJS, 58, 771 Bruenn, S. W. 1993, in Nuclear Physics in the Universe, ed. M. W. Guidry & M. R. Strayer (Bristol: IOP), 31 in AIP Conf. Ser. 170, Nuclear Spectroscopy of Astrophysical Sources, ed. N. Gehrels & G. H. Share (Melville, NY: Buras, R., Rampp, M., Janka, H. T., & Kifonidis, K. 2006, A&A, 447, 1049 Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, G. R., Fowler, W. A., & Hoyle, F. 1957, RvMP, Burrows, A. 2013, RvMP, 85, 245 Burrows, A., & The, L.-S. 1990, ApJ, 360, 626 Burrows, A., & van Riper, K. A. 1995, ApJ, 455, 215 Chevalier, R. A., & Fransson, C. 1994, ApJ, 420, 268 Chevalier, R. A., & Fransson, C. 2017, Thermal and Non-thermal Emission from Circumstellar Interaction (Cham: Springer International Publishing Chevalier, R. A., & Irwin, C. M. 2012, ApJL, 747, L17 Chugai, N. N., Chevalier, R. A., Kirshner, R. P., & Challis, P. M. 1997, ApJ, Clayton, D. D. 1974, ApJ, 188, 155 Clayton, D. D., Colgate, S. A., & Fishman, G. J. 1969, ApJ, 155, 75 Clayton, D. D., & The, L.-S. 1991, ApJ, 375, 221 Colgate, S. A., & White, R. H. 1966, ApJ, 143, 626 Collette, A. 2013, Python and HDF5: Unlocking Scientic Data (Sebastopol, Cook, W. R., Palmer, D. M., Prince, T. A., et al. 1988, ApJL, 334, L87 Couch, S. M. 2017, RSPTA, 375, 20160271 De Angelis, A., Tatischeff, V., Tavani, M., et al. 2017, ExA, 44, 25 Dewey, D., Dwarkadas, V. V., Haberl, F., Sturm, R., & Canizares, C. R. 2012, Dewey, D., Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., & Canizares, C. R. 2008, ApJL, Dotani, T., Hayashida, K., Inoue, H., et al. 1987, Natur, 330, 230 Dwarkadas, V. V. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1917 Firestone, R. B., Ekstrom, L. P., & Chu, S. Y. F. 1999, APS Division of Nuclear Physics Meeting Abstracts, CE.13 Fishman, G. J., Wilson, R. B., Paciesas, W. S., et al. 1990, AdSpR, 10, 55 Forrest, D. J., Chupp, E. L., Ryan, J. M., et al. 1980, SoPh, 65, 15 Fowler, W. A., & Hoyle, F. 1964, ApJS, 9, 201 Frank, K. A., Zhekov, S. A., Park, S., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, 40 Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 1993, ApJL, 408, L25 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 88 Fransson, C., Lundqvist, P., & Chevalier, R. A. 1996, ApJ, 461, 993 Fryxell, B., Arnett, D., & Mueller, E. 1991, ApJ, 367, 619 Garmire, G. P., Bautz, M. W., Ford, P. G., Nousek, J. A., & Ricker, G. R., Jr. Gehrels, N., Leventhal, M., & MacCallum, C. J. 1988, in AIP Conf. Ser. 170, Nuclear Spectroscopy of Astrophysical Sources, ed. N. Gehrels & G. H. Share (Melville, NY: AIP), 87 Gould, A., & Uza, O. 1998, ApJ, 494, 118 Grningsson, P., Fransson, C., Leibundgut, B., et al. 2008a, A&A, 492, 481 Grningsson, P., Fransson, C., Lundqvist, P., et al. 2008b, A&A, 479, 761 Harrison, F. A., Craig, W. W., Christensen, F. E., et al. 2013, ApJ, 770, 103 Hillier, D. J., & Dessart, L. 2012, MNRAS, 424, 252 Hix, W. R., & Harris, J. A. 2017, in Handbook of Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti & P. Murdin (Cham: Springer International Publishing Hoeflich, P., Khokhlov, A., & Mueller, E. 1992, A&A, 259, 549 Hoflich, P. 1991, A&A, 246, 481 Hflich, P. 2002, NewAR, 46, 475 Horiuchi, S., Beacom, J. F., Bothwell, M. S., & Thompson, T. A. 2013, ApJ, Hotokezaka, K., Wanajo, S., Tanaka, M., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 459, 35 Hoyle, F., & Fowler, W. A. 1960, ApJ, 132, 565 Hubbell, J. 1969, National Bureau of Standards Report NSRDS-NBS29, Hubbell, J. H., Gimm, H. A., & verb, I. 1980, JPCRD, 9, 1023 Hungerford, A. L., Fryer, C. L., & Rockefeller, G. 2005, ApJ, 635, 487 Hungerford, A. L., Fryer, C. L., & Warren, M. S. 2003, ApJ, 594, 390 Hunter, I., Dufton, P. L., Smartt, S. J., et al. 2007, A&A, 466, 277 Hunter, J. D. 2007, CSE, 9, 90 Inoue, H., Hayashida, K., Itoh, M., et al. 1991, PASJ, 43, 213 Janka, H.-T. 2012, ARNPS, 62, 407 Janka, H.-T. 2017, Neutrino-Driven Explosions (Cham: Springer International Janka, H.-T., Melson, T., & Summa, A. 2016, ARNPS, 66, 341 Jansen, F., Lumb, D., Altieri, B., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L1 Jencson, J. E., Kasliwal, M. M., Adams, S. M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 863, 20 Jencson, J. E., Kasliwal, M. M., Johansson, J., et al. 2017, ApJ, 837, 167 Jerkstrand, A., Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2011, A&A, 530, A45 Jerkstrand, A., Smartt, S. J., & Heger, A. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 3207 Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy: Open Source Scientic Tools for Python, http://www.scipy.org Joye, W. A., & Mandel, E. 2003, in ASP Conf. Ser. 295, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XII, ed. H. E. Payne, R. I. Jedrzejewski, & R. N. Hook (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 489 Junde, H., Su, H., & Dong, Y. 2011, NDS, 112, 1513 Kageyama, A., & Sato, T. 2004, GGG, 5, Q09005 Kasen, D., & Woosley, S. E. 2009, ApJ, 703, 2205 Kifonidis, K., Plewa, T., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2003, A&A, 408, 621 Koglin, J. E., Christensen, F. E., Craig, W. W., et al. 2005, Proc. SPIE, Korobkin, O., Hungerford, A. M., Fryer, C. L., et al. 2019, arXiv:1905.05089 Kromer, M., & Sim, S. A. 2009, MNRAS, 398, 1809 Kurfess, J. D., Johnson, W. N., Kinzer, R. L., et al. 1992, ApJL, 399, L137 Kurt, C. M., & Dufour, R. J. 1998, RMxAC, 7, 202 Leising, M. D. 1989, in Cosmic Gamma Rays and Cosmic Neutrinos, ed. M. M. Shapiro & J. P. Wefel (Dordrecht: Kluwer), 321 Leising, M. D. 1991, AdSpR, 11, 207 Leising, M. D., Kurfess, J. D., Clayton, D. D., et al. 1994, ApJL, 431, L95 Leising, M. D., & Share, G. H. 1990, ApJ, 357, 638 Li, W., Leaman, J., Chornock, R., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1441 Limongi, M., Straniero, O., & Chief, A. 2000, ApJS, 129, 625 Lodders, K. 2003, ApJ, 591, 1220 Lundqvist, P., & Fransson, C. 1996, ApJ, 464, 924 Madsen, K. K., Harrison, F. A., Markwardt, C. B., et al. 2015, ApJS, 220, 8 Maeda, K. 2006, ApJ, 644, 385 Maeda, K., Kutsuna, M., & Shigeyama, T. 2014, ApJ, 794, 37 Maeda, K., Terada, Y., Kasen, D., et al. 2012, ApJ, 760, 54 Mahoney, W. A., Varnell, L. S., Jacobson, A. S., et al. 1988, ApJL, 334, L81 Makino, F. & ASTRO-C Team 1987, ApL, 25, 223 Mattila, S., Dahlen, T., Efstathiou, A., et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, 111 Mattila, S., Lundqvist, P., Grningsson, P., et al. 2010, ApJ, 717, 1140 Matz, S. M., Share, G. H., Leising, M. D., Chupp, E. L., & Vestrand, W. T. McCray, R. 1993, ARA&A, 31, 175 McCray, R., & Fransson, C. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 19  The Astrophysical Journal, 882:22 (19pp), 2019 September 1 Menon, A., & Heger, A. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 4649 Menon, A., Utrobin, V., & Heger, A. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 438 Milne, P. A., Hungerford, A. L., Fryer, C. L., et al. 2004, ApJ, 613, 1101 Mitchell, R. C., Baron, E., Branch, D., et al. 2002, ApJ, 574, 293 Mller, B. 2016, PASA, 33, e048 Mller, E., Fryxell, B., & Arnett, D. 1991, A&A, 251, 505 Mller, T., Prieto, J. L., Pejcha, O., & Clocchiatti, A. 2017, ApJ, 841, 127 Nasa High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (HEASARC) 2014, HEAsoft: Unied Release of FTOOLS and XANADU, Astrophysics Source Code Library, ascl:1408.004 Nomoto, K., & Hashimoto, M. 1988, PhR, 163, 13 Nomoto, K., Thielemann, F.-K., & Yokoi, K. 1984, ApJ, 286, 644 Ofek, E. O., Zoglauer, A., Boggs, S. E., et al. 2014, ApJ, 781, 42 Palmer, D. M., Schindler, S. M., Cook, W. R., et al. 1993, ApJ, 412, 203 Panagia, N. 1999, in IAU Symp. 190, New Views of the Magellanic Clouds, ed. Y.-H. Chu (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 549 Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Macchetto, F., Adorf, H.-M., & Kirshner, R. P. Pejcha, O., & Prieto, J. L. 2015, ApJ, 806, 225 Pendleton, G. N., Paciesas, W. S., Fishman, G. J., Meegan, C. A., & Wilson, R. B. 1995, ApJ, 439, 963 Pinto, P. A., & Woosley, S. E. 1988, Natur, 333, 534 Pozdnyakov, L. A., Sobol, I. M., & Syunyaev, R. A. 1983, ASPRv, 2, 189 Prieto, J. L., Lee, J. C., Drake, A. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 745, 70 Rampp, M., & Janka, H.-T. 2002, A&A, 396, 361 Rester, A. C., Coldwell, R. L., Dunnam, F. E., et al. 1989, ApJL, 342, L71 Roques, J. P., Schanne, S., von Kienlin, A., et al. 2003, A&A, 411, L91 Ruiz-Lapuente, P., & Spruit, H. C. 1998, ApJ, 500, 360 Russell, S. C., & Bessell, M. S. 1989, ApJS, 70, 865 Russell, S. C., & Dopita, M. A. 1990, ApJS, 74, 93 Russell, S. C., & Dopita, M. A. 1992, ApJ, 384, 508 Rybicki, G. B., & Lightman, A. P. 1979, Radiative Processes in Astrophysics (New York: Wiley-Interscience) Saio, H., Nomoto, K., & Kato, M. 1988, Natur, 334, 508 Sandie, W. G., Nakano, G. H., Chase, L. F., Jr., et al. 1988a, in Supernova 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud, ed. M. Kafatos & A. G. Michalitsianos (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 366 Sandie, W. G., Nakano, G. H., Chase, L. F., Jr., et al. 1988b, ApJL, 334, L91 Santana, R., Crumley, P., Hernndez, R. A., & Kumar, P. 2016, MNRAS, Shigeyama, T., & Nomoto, K. 1990, ApJ, 360, 242 Sim, S. A. 2007, MNRAS, 375, 154 Sim, S. A., & Mazzali, P. A. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 1681 Simone, J., Oneill, T., Tumer, O. T., & Zych, A. D. 1985, ITNS, 32, 124 Smartt, S. J., Eldridge, J. J., Crockett, R. M., & Maund, J. R. 2009, MNRAS, Smith, N., Li, W., Filippenko, A. V., & Chornock, R. 2011, MNRAS, Strder, L., Briel, U., Dennerl, K., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L18 Summa, A., Ulyanov, A., Kromer, M., et al. 2013, A&A, 554, A67 Suntzeff, N. B., & Bouchet, P. 1990, AJ, 99, 650 Sunyaev, R., Grebenev, S., Kaniovsky, A., et al. 1991, in AIP Conf. Ser. 232, Gamma-Ray Line Astrophysics, ed. P. Durouchoux & N. Prantzos Sunyaev, R., Kaniovsky, A., Efremov, V., et al. 1987, Natur, 330, 227 Swartz, D. A., Sutherland, P. G., & Harkness, R. P. 1995, ApJ, 446, 766 Syunyaev, R. A., Efremov, V. V., Kaniovskii, A. S., et al. 1988, SvAL, 14, 247 Syunyaev, R. A., Kaniovskii, A., Efremov, V., et al. 1987, SvAL, 13, 431 Syunyaev, R. A., Kaniovskii, A. S., Efremov, V. V., et al. 1989, SvAL, 15, 125 Syunyaev, R. A., Kaniovskii, A. S., Efremov, V. V., et al. 1990, SvAL, 16, 171 Taddia, F., Stritzinger, M. D., Bersten, M., et al. 2018, A&A, 609, A136 Takahashi, T., Mitsuda, K., & Kelley, R. 2010, in X-ray Astronomy 2009; Present Status, Multi-Wavelength Approach and Future Perspectives in IAU Coll. 108: Atmospheric Diagnostics of Stellar Evolution, Lecture Notes in Physics 305, ed. K. Nomoto (Springer: Tanaka, Y. 1991, in Supernovae, ed. S. E. Woosley (New York: Springer Tartaglia, L., Sand, D. J., Valenti, S., et al. 2018, ApJ, 853, 62 Teegarden, B. J. 1991, AdSpR, 11, 217 Teegarden, B. J. 1994, ApJS, 92, 363 Teegarden, B. J., Barthelmy, S. D., Gehrels, N., Tueller, J., & Leventhal, M. The, L.-S., & Burrows, A. 2014, ApJ, 786, 141 Thielemann, F.-K., Hashimoto, M.-A., & Nomoto, K. 1990, ApJ, 349, 222 Truelove, J. K., & McKee, C. F. 1999, ApJS, 120, 299 Trundle, C., Dufton, P. L., Hunter, I., et al. 2007, A&A, 471, 625 Tueller, J. 1991, in AIP Conf. Ser. 232, Gamma-Ray Line Astrophysics, ed. P. Durouchoux & N. Prantzos (Melville, NY: AIP), 199 Tueller, J., Barthelmy, S., Gehrels, N., et al. 1991, S. E. Woosley (New York: Springer-Verlag), 278 Tueller, J., Barthelmy, S., Gehrels, N., et al. 1990, ApJL, 351, L41 Turner, M. J. L., Abbey, A., Arnaud, M., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L27 Utrobin, V. P. 2005, AstL, 31, 806 Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2015, A&A, Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., et al. 2019, A&A, van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CSE, 13, 22 Vedrenne, G., Roques, J.-P., Schnfelder, V., et al. 2003, A&A, 411, L63 Veigele, W. J. 1973, AD, 5, 51 Verner, D. A., Ferland, G. J., Korista, K. T., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1996, ApJ, Verner, D. A., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1995, A&AS, 109, 125 Wamsteker, W. 1993, in New Aspects of Magellanic Cloud Research, Vol. 416, ed. B. Baschek, G. Klare, & J. Lequeux (Berlin: Springer), 199 Weisskopf, M. C., Brinkman, B., Canizares, C., et al. 2002, PASP, 114, 1 Weisskopf, M. C., Tananbaum, H. D., Van Speybroeck, L. P., & ODell, S. L. Willingale, R., Starling, R. L. C., Beardmore, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., & OBrien, P. T. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 394 Wilson, R. B., Fishman, G. J., Meegan, C. A., Paciesas, W. S., & Pendleton, G. N. 1988, in AIP Conf. Ser. 170, Nuclear Spectroscopy of Astrophysical Sources, ed. N. Gehrels & G. H. Share (Melville, NY: Winkler, C., Courvoisier, T. J.-L., Di Cocco, G., et al. 2003, A&A, 411, L1 Wollaeger, R. T., Hungerford, A. L., Fryer, C. L., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845, 168 Wongwathanarat, A., Hammer, N. J., & Mller, E. 2010, A&A, 514, A48 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Mller, E. 2013, A&A, 552, A126 Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., Mller, E., Pllumbi, E., & Wanajo, S. 2017, Wongwathanarat, A., Mller, E., & Janka, H.-T. 2015, A&A, 577, A48 Woosley, S. E., & Hoffman, R. D. 1991, ApJL, 368, L31 Woosley, S. E., Pinto, P. A., & Ensman, L. 1988, ApJ, 324, 466 Woosley, S. E., Pinto, P. A., & Hartmann, D. 1989, ApJ, 346, 395 Woosley, S. E., & Weaver, T. A. 1995, ApJS, 101, 181 Xiao, L., & Eldridge, J. J. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 2597 Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., Dewey, D., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, 1190 Zych, A. D., Tumer, O. T., & Dayton, B. 1983, ITNS, 30, 383 The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10  2020. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab91ba Blasts from the Past: Supernova Shock Breakouts among X-Ray Transients in Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, and The Oskar Klein Centre, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden; dalp@kth.se Received 2020 April 20; revised 2020 May 7; accepted 2020 May 7; published 2020 June 11 The rst electromagnetic signal from a supernova (SN) is released when the shock crosses the progenitor surface. This shock breakout (SBO) emission provides constraints on progenitor and explosion properties. Observationally, SBOs appear as minute- to hour-long extragalactic X-ray transients. They are challenging to detect and only one SBO has been observed to date. Here, we search the XMM-Newton archive and nd 12 new SN SBO candidates. We identify host galaxies to nine of these at estimated redshifts of 0.11. The SBO candidates have energies of 1046 erg, timescales of 303000 s, and temperatures of 0.11 keV. They are all consistent with being SN SBOs, but some may be misidentied Galactic foreground sources or other extragalactic objects. SBOs from blue supergiants agree well with most of the candidates. However, a few could be SBOs from WolfRayet stars surrounded by dense circumstellar media, whereas two are more naturally explained as SBOs from red supergiants. The observations tentatively support non-spherical SBOs and are in agreement with asymmetries predicted by recent three-dimensional SN explosion simulations. eROSITA may detect 2 SBOs per year, which could be detected in live analyses and promptly followed up. Unied Astronomy Thesaurus concepts: Core-collapse supernovae (304); X-ray transient sources (1852); Massive The shock breakout (SBO) emission is the rst electro magnetic signal from a supernova (SN; Waxman & Katz 2017; Levinson & Nakar 2019). This emission carries information about the structure of the progenitor star. The most important physical properties that can be constrained are the progenitor radius, asymmetries, and nal mass-loss history. This means that SBOs offer a unique avenue to probe SN progenitors (Smartt 2009) and the SN explosion mechanism (Janka et al. The SBO emission is released when the radiation-mediated shock from the SN explosion crosses the surface of the star. However, if the circumstellar medium (CSM) is sufciently dense, the shock can propagate into the CSM and result in a longer CSM breakout. SBOs from the progenitor surface typically peak in X-rays, and evolve into ultraviolet and optical as the envelope cools and the ejecta expand. Extended CSM breakouts and the post-breakout cooling phase evolve on timescales of >1 day and are easier to detect. These timescales are within the reach of recent wide-eld optical SN surveys (Waxman & Katz 2017 and references therein). Henceforth, we focus on X-ray SBOs that evolve on timescales much shorter than 1day. The initial SBO and post-breakout cooling phase precede the commonly observed, months-long SN emission that is powered by reprocessed radioactive decay. The observable properties of SN SBOs are expected to be different for different progenitor types. Typical SBO energies, timescales, and temperatures (Matzner & McKee 1999; Nakar & Sari 2010; Sapir et al. 2013) for red supergiants (RSGs) are 1048erg, 1000 s, and 0.03 keV, respectively. The corresp onding values are 1046.5 erg, 100 s, and 0.3 keV for blue supergiants (BSGs); and 1045erg, 10 s, and 3 keV for Wolf Rayet (WR) stars. This assumes spherical symmetry, as well as negligible effects of the CSM. SBOs from RSGs are very soft and are expected to be heavily absorbed by the interstellar medium (ISM). In contrast, WR SBOs are much harder, but the total number of emitted photons is several orders of magnitude lower. Both the increased temperature (higher photon energies) and lower total energy reduce the total number of emitted photons, which makes WR SBOs difcult to detect. BSGs are the progenitor type that is most likely to be detected due to the trade-off between peak energy and number of emitted photons (Calzavara & Matzner 2004; Sapir et al. 2013; Waxman & Katz 2017). Finally, we note that expected to produce SBOs with temperatures of 20 keV. These SBOs are not expected to be detectable because the timescales are approximately 10 ms and the total energies are on the order of 1040erg (Nakar & Sari 2010; Piro et al. 2010). Theoretical aspects of SBOs have been studied for several decades. Early works explored the emission from non relativistic SBOs with simplied physics and for specic progenitor structures (e.g., Weaver 1976; Klein & Chevalier 1978; Ensman & Burrows 1992). More recent works have focused on developing models for more realistic progenitor structures with more detailed treatments of the relevant physics (Katz et al. 2010, 2012; Nakar & Sari 2010; Sapir et al. 2011, 2013; Ito et al. 2020). Notably, several theoretical works have stressed that many SBOs should have been serendipitously observed by previous and existing X-ray telescopes (Klein & Chevalier 1978; Calzavara & Matzner 2004; Sapir et al. 2013; Sapir & Halbertal 2014; Waxman & Katz 2017). The telescopes most likely to have detected SBOs are XMM-Newton, which has been in service since 2000, followed by ROSAT, which collected data between 1990 and 1999. Despite the signicant theoretical efforts, few observational searches have been performed, and only the SBO from SN2008D has been detected (Soderberg et al. 2008). The SBO detection from SN2008D was serendipitously detected as  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 a bright X-ray transient in a scheduled Swift observation of NGC2770. In addition to the direct detection of SN2008D, the SBO from SN1987A was indirectly observed by the effects of the SBO on the CSM (Ensman & Burrows 1992; Blinnikov et al. 2000). The only systematic searches in archival X-ray data for transients with SBO-like properties were of the ROSAT archive (Vikhlinin 1998; Greiner et al. 2000). Interestingly, Vikhlinin (1998) reported a number of candidates but was unable to securely identify their origins. While no systematic searches for SBOs have been carried out recently, transients on longer timescales have been studied, primarily in the Chandra archive (Bauer et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2019; Yang In this paper, we search for SN SBOs in archival XMM Newton data. Observationally, this implies that we search all public XMM-Newton observations for X-ray transients on timescales shorter than approximately 10ks. To our knowl edge, the XMM-Newton data have not been systematically searched for this kind of transient, even though several SBOs are predicted to be present in the data. We aim to identify SBO candidates and investigate the implications This paper is organized as follows. We describe the SBO search and identication process in Section 2, the host galaxies in Section 3, and provide details related to the data reduction of the nal candidates in Section 4. The spectral tting is described in Section 5 and observed properties of the SBOs are presented in Section 6. We investigate the SBO interpretation and its implications in Section 7, discuss contaminants and other potential astrophysical sources in Section 8, and conclude All uncertainties are 1 and one-sided limits are 3 unless stated otherwise. We adopt a flat CDM cosmology with a Hubble Lemaitre constant H0=70km s1Mpc1 and W =L 2. Identifying SBO Candidates To nd SN SBO candidates, we search for X-ray transients with typical timescales shorter than 10ks in archival XMM Newton data. These X-ray transients can only be observed if they happen to occur within the eld of view (FoV) of an X-ray telescope because SBOs decay well before the optical signal from a SN is detected (typically days or weeks later). XMM Newton (Jansen et al. 2001) is the telescope that is most likely to serendipitously observe SBOs because of the combination of its high effective area, high angular resolution, and large FoV of 0.2 deg2. For theoretically predicted BSG SBO properties (Section 1), we expect our search to be sensitive to a redshift of 1. This assumes favorable observing conditions and a low level of absorption along the line of sight. Before performing a blind search for X-ray transients, we crossmatch all XMM-Newton observations with known SNe and gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). In the current context, we restrict the matches to X-ray detections of the SBO, long before the optical SN detection or simultaneous with the prompt GRB phase. The purpose is to check if any known SNe or GRBs have been serendipitously observed, but we nd none. The catalog of SNe is from the Latest Supernovae website2 and the GRBs are from the Swift/BAT GRB Catalog (Lien et al. 2016). The SN catalog covers the entire XMM-Newton 2 Previously known as Bright Supernovae: http://www.rochesterastronomy. lifetime, while the GRB data is limited to the lifetime of Swift because only GRBs with sufciently accurate positions can be To avoid detecting a large number of variable Galactic X-ray sources unrelated to SN SBOs, we immediately reject all sources that are close to a star in Gaia or a known Galactic source in SIMBAD. More precisely, we reject sources within 5 of an object in Gaia DR2 (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2018) with a (positive) parallax with a signicance greater than 3. Similarly for SIMBAD, we reject X-ray sources if there is a SIMBAD object within 5 classied as a star, white dwarf, neutron star, black hole, or combinations thereof (i.e.,binaries). We develop a custom transient nder algorithm that we apply to all observations, and also search for transients among the sources in the 3XMM-DR8 catalog (Rosen et al. 2016). The details of both search methods are provided in Appendix A. The custom search algorithm is the most general and detects any transients starting from the event lists. The 3XMM-DR8 search focuses on identifying transient behavior among the cataloged X-ray sources. The two algorithms are largely redundant, but are complementary in some respects. The main difference is that our custom search is performed on all public observations with data archived at HEASARC as of 2019 November 11, whereas the latest observation included in 3XMM-DR8 is from 2017 November 30. We note that the standard proprietary period is 1 yr after data delivery, which means that the availability of public data during the last 1214 months of the time intervals is sparse. Our custom algorithm is very simple and does not treat the background and instrumental effects as carefully as 3XMM-DR8. The two algorithms identify 11,000 transient sources and we manually inspect the light curves, the time-integrated X-ray spectra, and images of these objects. The spectra and images are primarily useful for recognizing instrumental artifacts, variability caused by problematic extraction regions, and blended sources. Instrumental artifacts are generally restricted to one of the cameras and often affect individual pixels or columns. This is very different from astrophysical sources, which are convolved by the point-spread function (PSF) of the telescope in all cameras. The screening process up to this point reduces the number of X-ray transients to around 600. The nal step is to separate the extragalactic transients from Galactic foreground sources and artifacts. This separation essentially nds all SBO candidates, since SBOs are required to be associated with galaxies. The remaining non-SBO transients are primarily flaring dwarf stars that lack parallax in Gaia and are not identied in SIMBAD, or instrumental artifacts that are difcult to identify in time-integrated images. To perform this nal selection, we use time-resolved spectra and images. Additionally, we search all catalogs available at VizieR (Ochsenbein et al. 2000) and inspect available sky images of the source position (primarily X-rays, optical, and near infrared; NIR). We primarily use all HiPS sky images available through CDS/Aladin (Bonnarel et al. 2000; Boch & Fernique 2014), but also check for data in MAST, ESO Portal, and HEASARC in some cases. All objects that show clear signs of being instrumental, Galactic, or persistent are discarded.  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Note. Candidates are listed in descending order of condence of being an SN SBO. The same ordering is used throughout the paper. The last four candidates may be misidentied Galactic foreground sources (Section 8.1). We provide celestial coordinates in both the equatorial (, ) and Galactic (l, b) systems. The parameter  refers to the astrometric uncertainty and the last column provides the start times of the transients in UTC. We separate stars from galaxies using the optical and NIR images. The primary data used for host classication are from Pan-STARRS (Chambers et al. 2016), DES (Abbott et al. 2018), and SkyMapper (Wolf et al. 2018). We use morpho logical classiers to identify extended sources (galaxies),3 as well as stellaricity catalogs (McMahon et al. 2013; Tachibana & Miller 2018). However, since we are interested in accurate classiers of a few objects, we largely rely on visual inspection of available data for each object. The manual classication of sources generally agrees with automatic classiers, but allows us to identify rare cases, such as likely misclassications due to blending of neighboring stars. All objects that are possible SN SBOs are added to the nal sample. This decision is based on the light curve shape, duration, spectral shape, and the probability that the source is extragalactic based on available information. Furthermore, we require that the initial rise and a substantial part of the decay is contained within the observation. We discard sources that show persistent emission that appears associated with the transient before the initial rise, which would indicate that the source is a flaring persistent source. We do not discard any transients because they are too short. This means that the lower limit is effectively set by the temporal resolution of XMM-Newton, which is on the order of 100 ms for the most common observing modes. We also do not discard any transients because they are too long, but they are indirectly limited by the requirement of rising and decaying within the exposure time (typically 10130 ks). We do not use quantitative requirements at this last stage because of the difculty of strictly dening the We verify completeness of the search by inspecting the 100,000 most variable light curves from 3XMM-DR8 by eye to transients that were potentially missed by the algorithms, and nd one additional faint candidate. The level of variability in this context is measured by a likelihood test under the assumption that the light curve bin uncertainties are Gaussian. Altogether, we nd 12 SN SBO candidates. the SN SBO candidates are provided in Table 1. We designate each candidate by XT followed by +separate+stars+and+galaxies. gratia,https://outerspace.stsci.edu/display/PANSTARRS/How+to the date; the rst two numbers correspond to the year, the second two numbers to the month, and the last two numbers to the day (analogous to GRBs). We choose to present the SBO candidates in descending order of condence (loosely dened) Table 2 provides key parameters for candidates associated with the 12 transients. For reference, we also provide optical and NIR photometry of the hosts when available, and limits otherwise, transients have no clearly identied host, and it is also possible the observed hosts are Galactic objects misclassied as galaxies. We discuss potential misidentica tions and alternative sources for Section 8. Throughout the rest of the paper, we assume that the X-ray transients are SN SBOs. The most important parameter for the inferred properties of the transients is the redshift (z). Some of the redshifts are highly uncertain and we stress that this uncertainty propagates into parameters that depend on z. This mainly applies to the discussion of inferred SN properties in Section 7.2. In contrast, the observed properties in Section 6 are largely independent of z, with the only effect being an energy shift of the tted temperature and host galaxy absorption. The magnitude of this effect is relatively small (1+z) and does not qualitatively To estimate the redshifts of the host galaxies, we primarily rely on SED template tting. Photometric redshift techniques are generally more reliable if the Balmer (4000 ) or Lyman (912 ) break falls between two broad lters. This means that the optical data (Table B1) is the most constraining for our sources. Furthermore, we only use data from one survey (for each object) to ensure that the photometry is homogeneous in the sense that colors are correctly represented. For these reasons, we exclude the NIR data from the SED tting procedure. We are able to perform SED ts to seven hosts, whereas the remaining ve either lacked an identied host or In addition to the SED tting, we also consider additional independent information. The second most important constraint  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Notes. Offset is the distance between the transient and the host galaxy. We note that the offsets are comparable to the uncertainties of the X-ray positions (Table 1). Pgal is the probability of the source being a galaxy, based on morphology. These values are either from PS1-PSC (Pan-STARRS data, Tachibana & Miller 2018) or VHS (VISTA data, McMahon et al. 2013). For convenience, we also provide the distance expressed as the distance modulus (), the angular scale, and the absolute magnitude (M; in r-band unless otherwise noted). The Galaxy column provides tentative galaxy classiers based on the SED tting; Sa, Sb, Sd, and Sbc are late-type spirals, whereas SB denotes starburst galaxies. a Fiducial redshifts of 0.3 are used when insufcient information is available for a redshift estimate. b These values are in the J-band because the r-band data is much shallower for these sources. on z comes from the redshifts of neighboring galaxies. We utilize this when the SED tting appears unreliable or if optical data of the host is unavailable. After performing the SED ts and potentially including data from neighbors, we check if the favored redshift implies a reasonable absolute magnitude and radius for the galaxy (Blanton et al. 2003; Shen et al. 2003; Wolf et al. 2003; Ilbert et al. 2005). We also compare the distances with a reconstruction of the large-scale structure (Lavaux et al. 2019, E. Tsaprazi 2020, private communication). The reconstruction of the large-scale structure in the local universe (out to z=0.11 depending on the line of sight) provides a measure of density as a function of redshift along the line of sight. This is effectively the likelihood of z relative to the large-scale structure. The inclusion of independent constraints means that we do not always choose the SED t with the lowest 2 value, but rather analyze all data and adopt the redshift that appears to be most consistent overall. Finally, we note that the information from neighboring galaxies allows us to estimate redshifts even if no host galaxy is directly observed. This is only possible in some cases and is clearly We use the Le PHARE code (Arnouts et al. 1999; Ilbert et al. 2006) to perform the SED tting. The package includes a number of different galaxy SED libraries. We try to t all sources using the CWW-Kinney, AVEROIN, CFHTLS, and COSMOS sets. Each set is tted independently to explore the introduced by choosing different SED libraries. This also allows us to choose the SED that is most consistent with the supplementary information. The CWW library (Coleman et al. 1980) is based on four observed spectra (Ell, Sbc, Scd, Irr) and is commonly used for photometric redshift estimates. The CWW-Kinney sample extends the CWW set with six starburst galaxies (Calzetti et al. 1994; Kinney et al. 1996). Both the AVEROIN (Bruzual & Charlot 2003; Arnouts et al. 2007) and CFHTLS (Ilbert et al. 2006) samples are essentially updated and rened versions of the CWW-Kinney sample. Finally, (Ilbert et al. 2009) is based on more recent SEDs of three ellipticals and six spirals (S0, Sa, Sb, Sc, Sd, Sdm, Polletta et al. 2007), as well as 12 starbursts (Bruzual & Charlot 2003). We conclude this section with brief notes on the redshift of 1. Both XT161028 (z=0.29) and 151219 (z=0.62) have photometric redshifts from SDSS-IV Data Release 16 (Ahumada et al. 2019). We choose to adopt the SDSS values, which are very similar to the values obtained using our redshift estimation method (0.28 and 0.66, respectively). This choice does not affect the results and facilitates comparisons with other works that rely on SDSS redshifts. XT151219 also has redshift estimates of 0.67 (Kuijken et al. 2019) and 0.68 (Wright et al. 2019) using combined data from KiDS and VIKING, 0.27 (de Jong et al. 2017) using only KiDS, and 0.61 from the Hyper Suprime-Cam Subaru Strategic Program (Nishizawa et al. 2020). Large errors for a small fraction of photometric redshift estimates are common, which we believe explains 2. Our SED t results in a preliminary redshift of 0.088 for onding to a projected distance of 20 kpc at redshift) away from an mr=15.6 magAB galaxy and 44 (77 kpc) from an mr=13.4 magAB galaxy (Figure 1). The former has a photometric redshift of 0.097 (Dalya et al. 2016) and the latter a spectroscopic redshift of 0.095 (Jones et al. 2009). For these reasons, we adopt z=0.095 as the nal value for XT110621. 3. XT030206 is well-t by SB10 in the COSMOS sample, which is the second bluest starburst Furthermore, the SED captures the Balmer break well, which no other SED type does adequately. This lends condence to the photometric redshift and we take 4. XT070618 has no detected host but (58 kpc) away from an mr=20.83 magAB galaxy and from an mr=18.8 magAB galaxy  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Figure 1. SBO candidates in descending order of condence of being an SN SBO. Left column: Sky images centered on the positions of the X-ray transients (green circles with 1 radii). The green lines mark the candidate host galaxies. The bottom texts are the sources of the images, which are all from HiPS except for VISTA and Subaru data. The color scales are arbitrary and are chosen to maximize contrast. The image colors loosely represent source colors for multi-band data. All images are 11 arcmin2 and the lines pointing to the galaxies are 3. North is up and east is left. Middle column: combined EPIC light curves in the observed 0.310 keV range. Blue lines are binned light curves with light blue uncertainties, and orange lines are smoothed light curves (bin sizes and kernel widths are given in the legends). The dashed green lines show the separation into rst and second halves for the time-resolved spectral analysis. The gray regions show the typical timescales (tR/c; Section 7.1). The black crosses are the peak fluxes (Section 4) and the horizontal black lines (lower left and right corners, barely visible in some cases) are the flux limits (Table 3). Right column: upper segments show the observed time-integrated spectra (black crosses) tted with the absorbed blackbody (blue) and power-law (orange) models. Lower segments show the residuals normalized by the uncertainties using the same colors as above for the respective models. For visual clarity, we combine all EPIC data and bin to 12 energy bins logarithmically. (Figure 1). We assume that all three sources are located at the same redshift and perform SED ts to the two bright galaxies. Reasonable agreement is achieved for z=0.37, which we take as the estimate for XT070618 despite the 5. XT060207 lacks information for any type of redshift estimate. Therefore, we simply adopt a ducial value of z=0.3. This redshift results in reasonable inferred SBO parameters and is also motivated by the photometry limits on a host galaxy. A much lower redshift would require a very faint host, whereas a much higher redshift would imply an extreme X-ray transient. However, we stress 6. XT100424 has acceptable SED ts for redshifts in the range 0.080.4. There are two galaxies with mr=16.0  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 and 16.5, respectively, at distances of 63 (146 kpc) at z=0.10 and 71 (166 kpc) at z=0.16. These two redshifts are photometric redshifts from the GLADE catalog (Dalya et al. 2016). We adopt a redshift of 0.13 for XT100424 (implicitly for all three galaxies) based on 7. XT151128 has acceptable SED ts for redshifts in the range 0.20.65. The best t is around 0.48, which we adopt as the favored redshift. 8. We also use the ducial value of z=0.3 for XT050925 and 160220. In contrast to XT060207, there are NIR these sources and z=0.3 results in reasonable host NIR absolute magnitudes. 9. The redshift for XT140811 is solely based on SED ts, which favor a redshift of 0.57. 10. The redshift for XT040610 is determined based on photometric redshifts from SDSS12 (Alam et al. 2015) of eight neighboring galaxies within 20 (123 kpc). The average redshift is 0.5 with a standard deviation of 0.17. We take z=0.5 as the redshift of XT040610 despite the 4. Observations and Data Reduction We perform data reduction of all selected sources (Table 1) largely following standard procedures. This data reduction is independent of the automatic processing used for nding the transients (Appendix A). We use XMM-Newton Science Analysis System (SAS) version 18.0.0 (Gabriel et al. 2004)  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 and the latest CCF as of 2019 December 11. We inspect the images from the Optical Monitor (Mason et al. 2001) on board XMM-Newton when available, but nd no variable emission that appears connected with the X-ray transients. Henceforth, we only consider data from the European Photon Imaging Camera (EPIC). All 12 sources are covered by pn and MOS2, while 8 sources are covered by MOS1 since part of its FoV has We apply the latest calibration using the tasks epproc and emproc. We also apply lters to keep data only in the range 0.310 keV with standard ltering parameters. We select temporary source regions and nal background regions by hand. The background regions typically have radii of 1 and are selected to be close to the source, free of other sources, and on the same CCD chip as the source. We use these source and background regions to construct preliminary light curves. Next, we dene ve time intervals: before, during, after, and the rst and second halves of the transient. The halves of the transient are dened to have approximately equal fluences. These two halves are only used for time-resolved spectral analysis (Section 5). All time intervals are dened by eye based on inspections of the preliminary source light curves. We remove periods of high background before and after the dened duration of the transient following standard procedures. The background levels during the transients are not high enough to signicantly affect the analysis. Only XT110621 occurs during a high background interval, but is still clearly detected with a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of 5. The median  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 S/N across all sources is 7, where the longer transients contribute to a lower ratio. We note that the S/N only includes the photon number statistics and does not detection statistic, which also includes the spatial information. The lowest detection statistic, as dened by emldetect (Watson et al. 2009), is 20 for XT151128. This approximately corresponds to a false detection probability of 2109. With the time intervals, it is possible to obtain an improved estimate of the source position by tting to the image created from the duration of the transient. We use the SAS task edetect_ch ain to t for the position in the 0.310 keV range in all cameras simultaneously. We add in quadrature, a systematic uncertainty of 1 24, to the statistical uncertainty from edetect_chain, to obtain the nal position uncertainty. We adopt this position as the nal source position and create the nal source regions. The radii for these regions are chosen to maximize the S/N, which is computed by the SAS task eregionanalyse. The next step of the data preparation is to create a light curve using the updated source region, and create images and extract spectra during each of the ve time intervals. The light curve and images are created following standard XMM-Newton data reduction procedures. We largely follow standards when extracting the spectra as well. However, we group all source spectra to at least 1 count per spectral bin, which is necessary for using C-stat in XSPEC.5 The ancillary response les and 4 XMM-Newton Calibration Technical Note XMM-SOC-CAL-TN-0018. 5 https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSappendixStatistics  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 response matrix les for the individual cameras are generated using the SAS tasks arfgen and rmfgen, respectively. Solely for presentation purposes, we also combine the spectra from the three cameras using especcombine. The individual spectra used for the merged EPIC spectra are binned using a common channel grid corresponding to uniform bins of width To determine upper limits on the source flux during the time intervals before and after the transient, we use the SAS task esensmap. The task computes the photon flux required for a hypothetical source to be detected in the combination of all three instruments. To convert the photon flux to physical units, we use the best-t model of the time-averaged spectrum (Section 5). For the upper limits, we choose a detection threshold (DET_ML) of 5.9, which corresponds to a chance probability for detection of 2.7103 (3) under the null To estimate the peak flux of each transient, we start by nding the shortest time interval during which 25% of all source photons are detected. This is done by searching a combined EPIC source event list. Having determined the time interval with the highest photon flux, we use epiclccorr to apply all corrections to obtain the corrected count rate with error bars. This task is usually used to produce light curves, whereas we use it here to compute a count rate during a single time interval. This is performed on the cameras individually, with the single-bin time interval provided as input. The nal step is to convert the peak count rates from epiclccorr to fluxes. We do this by scaling the fluxes obtained from the time integrated spectral ts (Section 5) by the ratio of the peak to the time-averaged photon count rate. spatially close photons are interpreted incorrectly. They could be detected as a single photon with higher energy or flagged as bad, a phenomenon referred to as pile-up. There is some for pile-up during the brightest phases of our transients. XT070618 is the most likely to suffer from pile up, with a peak count rate of 0.4 photons per frame in the pn CCD. The standard SAS method used for assessing pile-up, is inconclusive because too few photons are inspect the raw (ODF), calibrated (unltered), and nal event lists and nd no signs of suspected pile-up events. All light curves are practically identical, including the marginal double Finally, we comment on the flux of the object XT151219. It is close to (but not on) a chip gap on the pn CCD. A part of the standard procedure when creating pn spectra is to reject events close to chip gaps (FLAG==0). This is performed because of energy calibration uncertainties for events not completely contained on the chip. For this object, this means rejecting 20% of the pn events. The spectral shape is unaffected, but the overall flux is likely underestimated by 15% (the source is covered by both pn and MOS2). This does not affect any conclusions qualitatively and we do not attempt to correct two simple models to the data: a blackbody (zbbody) and power-law (zpowerlw) model. Both models also include an absorption component for the Milky Way absorption (tbabs, Wilms et al. 2000) and a redshifted absorption component (ztbabs) representing host galaxy absorption. The Milky Way column density is frozen to the weighted estimate of Willingale et al. (2013), whereas the redshifted column densities are tted for. Both absorption components use the abundances of Wilms et al. (2000) and cross sections of Verner & Yakovlev (1995). We freeze the redshifts to our estimated values (Table 2) and ignore the uncertainties that are implicitly introduced. The redshifts only have a minor impact on the tted parameters (Section 6) but have signicant implications for the inferred physical properties, which are discussed separately (Section 7.2). The blackbody model is a simplied representation of a complete physical model for the time-integrated spectrum of an SN SBO (Section 7.1). The integrated spectra of SBOs are not expected to be perfectly thermal, but a blackbody is a reasonable approximation given the large uncertainties. Sapir et al. (2013) showed that the time-integrated spectrum of an peak, where hpeak is the photon the spectral peak (measured in fluence per logarithmic frequency; F) and Tpeak is the peak surface temperature. In comparison, the spectral peak of a blackbody of temperature T peaks at hpeak=2.82T. Therefore, the tted temperature is a reasonable approximation of the peak surface The interpretation of the power-law model is simpler than the interpretation of the blackbody because we only use the power law as a phenomenological model. Its purpose is to quantify the observed spectral slope by tting for the photon comparisons with the blackbody model. We also t the blackbody and power-law models to the spectra from the rst and second halves of the transients. However, since the aim is to solely quantify spectral evolution, the host absorptions are frozen to the best-t values from the time-integrated ts. This assumes that all information about the evolution of the spectral shape is captured by the temperature We use XSPEC version 12.10.1f (Arnaud 1996) for the spectral analysis. The spectra are tted simultaneously to data from all three EPIC CCDs in the entire 0.310 keV range. We introduce a free cross-normalization between the instruments. The relative calibration of the instruments are accurate to within 5%10% (Madsen et al. 2017; Plucinsky instruments cannot be reliably constrained in a few cases of extremely few counts. The analysis is performed with the C-stat t statistic (Cash 1979) in XSPEC, which is the W statistic when a Poissonian background is included.6 computed using the error command in XSPEC, which varies the t parameters until the change in t statistic reaches a given threshold. This assumes that the difference in t statistic is 2 for q degrees of freedom. This is a reasonable approximation even for Poissonian data except for a small Yaqoob 1998). For the time-integrated ts, there are three free parameters. An appropriate threshold for 1 condence 6 https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSappendixStatistics  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 intervals and three independent parameters is a change in t statistic of 3.5 (Avni 1976; Cash 1976; Lampton et al. 1976). the time-resolved ts with two free parameters, the corresponding value is 2.3. For reference, we note that X-ray analyses commonly use a critical value of 2.706, which represents the 90% interval for one parameter of The goodness of ts are computed by simulating 1000 spectra using the fakeit command in XSPEC. The spectra are simulated using the best-t model at the energy resolution of the channels of the instruments. The faked spectra are then grouped to at least 1 count per bin, analogously to the real data. The models are then tted to these spectra. The nal goodness measure is represented by the fraction of ts to faked spectra with better test statistic than ts to the observed data. A good t should on average result in a fraction of 0.5. For our purposes and given the systematic uncertainties, we consider goodness fractions relatively close to 1 as acceptable. The t statistics and goodness measures for all ts are provided in Table C1. candidates. These are practically independent of any modeling uncertainties. The redshifts enter into the tted blackbody temperature and host galaxy absorption, but do not affect these values much. In Figure 1, we provide the sky images, light curves, and spectra for all SBO candidates. The purpose of the sky images is only to show the host galaxy candidates and the neighboring sources relative to the X-ray transients. Properties of the light curves and spectra are presented separately in Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively. The light curves in Figure 1 show the temporal evolutions of the transients. We note the signicantly different durations and timescales (Section 7.1) ranging from 30 to 10,000 s. All transients show gradual rises that appear at least marginally resolved, although quite steep in some cases. In particular, no source shows a prompt (<10 s) rise followed by an immediate implications for interpreting the origins of the transients, since some are characterized by sharp rises (Section 8). We are not able to quantify the properties of the decaying tails accurately, since all transients quickly fade below the detection limits. Dividing the light curves into different energy bands is limited by the number of photons, and does not reveal any signicant behavior that is not captured by the time-resolved spectra (Section 6.2). Finally, we note in passing an apparent, curious double-peak structure in the light curves of XT070618 and 060207. We do not consider this further since it appears statistically marginal, but a clearly double-peaked X-ray transient has previously been reported by The average fluxes, peak fluxes, and constraints before and after the transients are provided in Table 3 (with the peak fluxes determined as described in Section 4). This shows that the transients have large dynamic ranges of at least 10 in all cases and substantially higher in many cases. The constraints on the dynamic ranges are primarily limited by the telescope the transients, we nd some evidence for emission outside the main transient event. This is the case for XT161028, which is marginally detected after the main event. This is likely the decaying tail that extends beyond the selected time interval used to dene the duration. No sub-threshold source is present before the transient and the limit indicates that any emission was lower than the marginal detection after. We also nd no indications of a source in two XMM-Newton observations7 14yr before the transient. XT151219 shows a marginal quiescent flux level before the transient. XMM-Newton observed this position 7months before and 18months after the transient.8 The last observation marginally detects a flux level roughly half (consistent within uncertainties) of the level seen just before the transient. We interpret this as quiescent X-ray emission from an underlying active galactic nucleus. Using the flux measured just before the transient, the inferred 0.310 keV luminosity is (1.40.4) erg s 1 for z=0.62. No emission is detected in the earliest observation and just after the transient in the main observation. This is likely due to the limited sensitivity and inspections of the images reveal a sub-threshold source present The time-integrated spectral ts are shown in Figure 1 and the parameters from all ts are provided in Table 4, including the time-resolved ts. Statistical measures of all ts are provided in Table C1. All ts are acceptable, although there are indications that some spectral features are not properly captured by the simple models. We do not attempt to t more complicated models due to the data quality and modeling uncertainties. Additionally, the sources likely evolve in time, which could introduce apparent spectral features in the time All transients are soft but show a range of different color temperatures in the range 0.11 keV, or alternatively, photon indices of 24. We note that there is an observational bias toward soft sources due to the instrumental characteristics of XMM-Newton and the detection statistic, which scales with the number of photons rather than fluence. The time-resolved ts show that the evolutions generally go from harder to softer, although the signicance is marginal in some cases. No source shows any signicant hardening. Overall, the power-law model seems to result in slightly better ts. It is possible that this is due to a stronger degeneracy between the photon index and host absorption than between the temperature and host absorption. This behavior can be seen from the tted host absorption column densities, which generally are lower for the blackbody model than the power law model. We do not attempt to evaluate if the blackbody or the power-law model is more reliable in this respect. This would require assuming an underlying SBO model, modeling the absorption of galaxies, and computing the survey sensitivity, which is beyond the scope of this paper. We simply conclude that the photon indices might be unreliable and that the degeneracy can result in apparently better ts when compared to the blackbody model. Any uncertainties in the photon indices do not affect our conclusions signicantly since they are not used for inferring physical parameters. 7 Observation IDs 0021140801 and 002114901. 8 Observation IDs 0770380201 (before) and 0802860201 (after).  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Note. Observed fluxes in the 0.310 keV range computed using the time-integrated best-t spectrum. The choice of model is based on the goodness of t (Table C1). The last two columns show the dynamic ranges of the transients. Note. Parameters without integer subscripts are for the time-integrated spectra. The subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the rst and second intervals of the time-resolved analysis, respectively. The Galactic absorptions (NH,MW) are frozen during the ts. The absorption column densities NH,BB and NH,PL are the redshifted host galaxy absorptions from the blackbody and power-law ts, respectively. Parameter estimates are missing for unconstrained ts. inferring physical parameters In this section, we outline the SBO model (Section 7.1) used (Section 7.2). We then discuss the effects of asymmetries (Section 7.3) and CSM (Section 7.4), which are not incorporated into the model. We conclude by commenting on the individual SBO candidates and how the observations compare to theory (Section 7.5). We use a model for SN SBOs to connect the observed properties to physical parameters of the SN and its progenitor. The aim is to infer the shock velocity (vsh), progenitor radius (R), breakout density (), and ejecta velocity (vej). The ejecta velocity is the typical bulk velocity dened as where Eexp is the SN explosion energy and Mej the ejecta mass. The observed parameters that constrain these properties are the bolometric SBO energy (ESBO) and color temperature (T). Here, we closely follow the summary of SN SBO theory by Waxman & Katz (2017). For simplicity, we consider the non relativistic regime even though BSGs are expected to be in the transitional region (0.1c) and possibly be mildly relativistic in some cases. Non-relativistic SBOs are also more accurately modeled from a theoretical perspective. More detailed SBO modeling is not motivated due to the limited data and uncertainties in the redshifts. The bolometric SBO energy is given by Equation (31) of in general for integer n and 0.340.34 the opacity. The opacity is given by 5 cm2g1, where X is the H mass fraction. This implies that  ranges from 0.2cm2g1 (H-poor) to  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Note. Timescales (tR c) are dened by hand (Section 7.1) and are given in the observer frame. The redshift correction is applied when computing the radius . The luminosities and energies are bolometric. The parameters Lpeak and ESBO are observational and do not rely on the SBO modeling. The intervals for Lpeak and ESBO only represent the X-ray tting uncertainties and do not include the redshift uncertainties. The large uncertainties for XT151128 are due to a combination of few photons and a low lower temperature limit. We refrain from estimating the uncertainties for the remaining parameters since they include uncertainties in the redshifts as well as the SBO modeling, which are difcult to quantify (Sections 3 and 7.1). Equation (27) of Waxman & Katz (2017) (H-rich). The shock velocity is given by ej and f is a numerical factor of order unity that depends on the detailed envelope structure (Appendix A of Calzavara & Matzner 2004). The numerical factor for BSGs is given by Equation (37) of Sapir et al. (2013) where 0.620.62= is the mean molecular weight and L is luminosity. The parameter  is given by 1, where Y is the He mass fraction. Although the time-integrated color expressed analytically, it can be tted by Equation (50) of where  is given by Equation (28) of Waxman & Katz (2017) The observed data are not able to constrain all parameters, in particular those that the observables are relatively insensitive to. Therefore, we take some values based on SN1987A because SBOs should be most easily detectable from BSGs similar to SN1987A (Sapir et al. 2013; Sapir & Halbertal 2014; Waxman & Katz 2017). Specically, we assume Mej=15 (Alp et al. 2019; Menon et al. 2019; Utrobin et al. 2019), L=150,000 L (Woosley et al. 1987), and a H-rich surface composition of X=0.7 and Y=0.3. To illustrate the weak dependence on these parameters, we note that choosing a H-poor star with a factor of 10 lower Mej and a factor of 10 higher L only changes R by a factor of 0.83, vsh by 0.86,  by 4.0, and vej by 1.7. With the ducial SN1987A values, Equations (2), (3), (5), and (6) form a system of equations with 4 unknowns. The solution process can be simplied by solving Equation (3) for vej, inserting it into Equation (6), and using Equation (2) to express  in terms of ESBO, which results in for our assumed parameter values. In addition to the constraint on R from the model above, an independent constraint can be placed based on the light curve. The light curve shape is initially determined by the light travel time from different parts of the progenitor. The light curve rises and remains approximately constant until a time of after which it starts decaying (Nakar & Sari 2010). This light approximately spherical. Furthermore, it is only valid if tR/c is longer than the dynamical time of the breakout shell (breakout shell width over vsh). This is expected to be the case for all but the most extended RSGs, which are likely to be too cool to be time argument only applies if the SBO is at Here, we use the model outlined above to infer physical SN parameters, which are provided in Table 5. The table includes values that are derived using both the energetics and the light curve shape. The primary goal is to determine if the obtained parameters are consistent with typical SN SBO values. This is mainly relying on comparisons with theoretical predictions due to the lack of observations. We do not attempt to model and propagate all uncertainties into these parameters. However, we uncertainties are large. More detailed analyses of the transients require spectroscopic redshifts and will be the subject of future From the light curves (Figure 1), we dene the typical timescales by hand, as described above. We denote radii  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 determined using this method Rt to distinguish Rt from the radii inferred from the energetics, which we denote RE. The peak luminosities (Lpeak) and total SBO energies (ESBO) rely on the redshift estimates and extrapolations of the spectra. We use the time-integrated best-t blackbody models to extrapolate from the observed 0.310 keV range to obtain the bolometric quantities. For the typical best-t temperatures of the 0.310 keV range already captures the vast majority of the bolometric flux. The time-averaged luminosities obtained from the ts are scaled to the light curve peaks using the peak-to-average flux ratio (Section 4; Table 3). Having computed the energy ESBO, it is straightforward to solve for the remaining parameters (Section 7.1). Finally, we note that Lpeak is more uncertain than ESBO, both from an observational and theoretical perspective. Therefore, we focus on ESBO for the current analysis and provide Lpeak solely for comparisons with other X-ray transients in general. The parameter values in Table 5 are in reasonable agreement with predictions for SN SBOs. For reference, we compute the expected values for a SBO similar to SN1987A. In addition to the assumed values in Section 7.1, we complete the model by taking R=40 R and Eexp=1.51051 erg (McCray 1993). For this set of parameters, the derived properties are: 1046 erg, vsh=23,000km s1, vej=1800km s1, and The values for ESBO, RE, , and Eexp are generally within an the predicted values. These are dependent and primarily show that the observed ESBO, and to a lesser extent T, are within the range of predictions for SBOs. Estimates of vsh and vej are more closely clustered around 20,000km s1 and 2000km s1, respectively. This is expected because the velocities are mainly constrained by, and quite insensitive to, T through Equations (3) and(5). This implies that most soft spectra would result in reasonable vsh and vej. there is a strong observational bias against detecting objects cooler than 0.1 keV because of the lower 0.3 keV energy limit of XMM-Newton and ISM absorption. It is worth pointing out that the independent estimates of R are within a factor of 2 for 5 of the sources. These two estimates are completely independent and lend some strength to the SBO interpretation. The remaining objects all have substantially larger Rt than RE. This is a consequence of the observed timescale being longer than the expected timescale. Possible reasons for longer timescales are asymmetries and dense CSM structures, as discussed below. Strong asymmetries in core-collapse SNe are predicted from theory (Janka et al. 2016; Mller 2016; Couch 2017) and clearly supported by observations (Larsson et al. 2016; Abelln et al. 2017; Grefenstette et al. 2017). Asymmetric SBOs have been studied (Suzuki & Shigeyama 2010; Couch et al. 2011), but have relied on bimodal, jet-like, two-dimensional axisym metric explosions. These asymmetries were introduced by hand but showed that asymmetries could contribute to longer timescales and signicantly affect the light curve shape. To rst order, the asymmetries only affect when the shock reaches the surface. The minor differences in shock velocity and breakout angle should have much smaller effects on the SBO properties. This means that only the light curve shape should be More recently, Wongwathanarat et al. (2015) performed self consistent three-dimensional neutrino-driven SN simulations to late times past SBO (Figure 14 of Wongwathanarat et al. 2015). They used a set of RSG and BSG single-star progenitors and have now also studied BSGs that are the results of binary mergers (Menon & Heger 2017; A. Wongwathanarat 2020, private communication). Although these simulations do not propagates through the star and breaks the surface. For the single-star BSG progenitor B15, the time difference between the rst and last parts of the shock breaking the surface is approximately 200 s. This is a relatively spherical model. The BSG merger progenitors are more asymmetric and show time differences of 1000 s. These values can be compared to the times required for the shock to propagate through the stars of 45007500 s. For W15, which is a relatively asymmetric RSG, the fastest shock breaks out at 70,000 s and the slowest at We emphasize that these asymmetries are not introduced by hand and develop spontaneously during the explosion from initial seed perturbations. This implies that asymmetries are expected to develop even for spherical progenitors. It is also worth pointing out that aspherical SBOs could both shorten or lengthen the observed timescale, depending on the viewing To summarize, it is likely that asymmetric shocks develop during the core-collapse process. These asymmetries signi cantly affect the duration and light curve shape of the observed SBO. We tentatively conclude that asymmetries can introduce time variations of up to 20% of the shock crossing time of the star, which is an order of magnitude longer than the light crossing time R/c in extreme cases. The effects of asymmetries on the timescale are sufcient to reduce the tensions between Rt and RE in the cases where they are signicantly different. The CSM affects the SBO emission if the optical depth of the CSM is larger than c/vsh. In these cases, the shock does not break out at the surface, but instead propagates into the CSM. A notable example is the initial X-ray transient associated with SN2008D (Soderberg et al. 2008), which is particularly interesting because of similarities with some of our SBO erg s 1, total energy of 61045 erg, a , and a 2 power-law spectrum (Modjaz et al. 2009). A thermal spectrum with a temperature of 0.75 keV ts the data worse but is still statistically acceptable. From these values and using our methods, we would infer A common interpretation of the SN2008D X-ray transient is a SBO from the explosion of a WR star surrounded by a thick wind (Chevalier & Fransson 2008; Balberg & Loeb 2011; Svirski & Nakar 2014). CSM SBOs are also often used to explain observations of TypeIIn and super-luminous SNe (Section 6.1 of Waxman & Katz 2017 and references therein). However, these SBOs are very different and are not expected to appear as X-ray transients on timescales that our searches are We do not attempt to explore the effects of a dense CSM in detail due to the wide range of possible scenarios and the observational uncertainties. Instead, we simply note that a  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 dense CSM could increase the timescale and that some of our candidates are similar to SN2008D. 7.5. Notes on Individual Objects Even though the inferred parameters (Table 5) agree reasonably well with theoretical predictions, there are some aspects that cause tensions with a clean SBO interpretation. In light of the discussions of asymmetries and effects of the CSM, we provide more detailed comments on individual objects 1. The rst two objects, XT161028 and 151219, agree very well with BSG SBO predictions. The derived quantities are close to ducial SBO values under the assumptions of spherical symmetry and thin CSM. The only parameter that stands out is ESBO for XT161028, which is an order of magnitude lower than the reference value. Given the uncertainties, we do not consider this to be a major problem and conclude that both objects are strong SN 2. All properties of XT1106219 agree well with predictions for BSG SBOs, except for the timescale. This can be seen from the discrepancy between Rt=150 and RE=14. One possible explanation for the longer observed time scale is an asymmetric BSG SBO. Another possibility is an SBO from a WR with a dense wind, similar to the SN2008D SBO. They both have practically the same peak luminosities and total energies, although the light curve shapes are slightly different and XT110621 has a softer spectrum. Given the expected variances in light curves and spectra, a similar origin for XT110621 is possible. We are not able to distinguish between an asymmetric BSG SBO and a dense CSM WR SBO, but conclude that both are possible origins. 3. XT030206 is the most energetic object and would require extreme SN parameters. Interestingly, the inferred Eexp of 61051 erg is in the range of (7.15.4)1051 erg typical of TypeIc-BL SNe (Taddia et al. 2019). Our modeling does not strictly apply to these SNe and any 4. Both XT070618 and 060207 agree well with the BSG SBO interpretation. The main uncertainty for objects is due to the lack of host detections. This implies that the redshift estimates are highly uncertain, which propagates into all inferred parameters. 5. XT100424 and 151128 are the coolest objects and are much slower than expected for typical SBOs from BSGs. The observed properties suggest that they might instead be associated with SBOs from RSGs. A less-explored possibility is SBOs from yellow supergiants (Smartt 2009; Ergon et al. 2014), which in the current context effectively is an intermediate class between RSGs and BSGs. The interpretations for these two objects are mainly driven by the timescales and temperatures, which 9 After submission of our paper, Novara et al. (2020) reported an independent discovery of XT110621 (EXMM 023135.0603743 using their notation). Importantly, they nd a spectroscopic redshift of 0.092 for the host galaxy (compared to our value of 0.095), which eliminates much of the uncertainty for our analysis of XT110621. Overall, their and our results and interpretations agree very well with each other. There are minor differences in the spectral ts, which likely are due to a combination of different methods, background (Section 4), and the high host absorption. are observationally reliable. The total energies are more than an order of magnitude lower than predicted for RSG SBOs, but are uncertain due to the observed energy range relative to the temperatures, as well as the redshift uncertainties. The transients are also hotter than RSG SBO predictions, but this is anticipated because of the very strong observational biases against majority of RSG SBOs. The timescales are also slightly 6. The last four transients, XT050925, 160220, 140811, and 040610 have longer timescales than expected for BSG SBOs. They are all largely similar to XT110621 (and implicitly also the SN 2008D SBO) and the same arguments apply to these four sources. The main differences for these last four transients are the uncertain host redshifts and the risk of being foreground contam In this section, we explore possible sources other than SNe that could produce the observed transients. Section3 of Bauer et al. (2017) provides a similar discussion with a slightly different focus. They discuss CDF-SXT1, which suffers from similar potential contaminants as our SBO candidates. The most likely sources to be confused for SN SBOs are flares from Galactic late-type dwarfs (Section 8.1). We discuss GRBs as potential sources in Section 8.2 and a number of less probable sources in Section 8.3. We note that the predicted number of SN SBOs (Sapir & Halbertal 2014; Waxman & Katz 2017) is comparable to the number we observe, which lends strength to X-ray flares from late-type dwarf stars (Gdel 2004; Gdel & Naz 2009; Benz & Gdel 2010) could potentially be confused for SBO candidates, in cases where a host galaxy is not clearly detected. The coolest object observed to flare in X-rays is an L1dwarf (de Luca et al. 2020). A qualitative difference between SN SBOs and dwarf flares is that dwarf flares are recurrent (and any dwarfs with multiple flares would already have been excluded from our sample). Faint flares are frequent and occur up to tens of times per day, while the rate of the most powerful flares are limited by the observed sample size (Loyd et al. 2018a, 2018b). The distribution of peak X-ray (0.310 keV) luminosities of dwarf flares extends to 1030 erg s 1 and decreases steeply with peak flux (Cook et al. 2014; Williams et al. 2014; Loyd et al. 2018a, 2018b; de Luca et al. 2020). The effective temperatures for the majority of the flares are in the range 0.52 keV (Pallavicini et al. 1990; Robrade & Schmitt 2005; Pye et al. 2015; de Luca et al. 2020). Typical timescales range from a few hundred to a few thousand seconds, and the dynamic ranges vary from a factor of 2 to more than 300 (Favata et al. 2000; Pandey & Singh 2008; Robrade et al. 2010; For our purposes, we focus on the extreme cases despite their low rates. The 2014 April 23 flare from DGCVn is the most luminous observed Mdwarf flare (Caballero-Garca et al. 2015; Osten et al. 2016). DGCVn is a binary system composed of two M4Ve dwarfs with a combined absolute J The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 band magnitude of 7.2magAB. The flare reached a peak flux of erg s 1 and the dominant flare component evolved on a timescale of 300 s. Another comparable event is the 2008 April 25 EVLac flare (Osten et al. 2010). EVLac is an 8.5magAB. The X-ray flare reached a peak flux of 1032 erg s 1 and the dominant component evolved on a timescale of these events are very hard, with peak temperatures of 25 keV (DG CVn) and 10 keV (EV Lac), and even triggered the gamma-ray burst monitor Swift/BAT (Barthelmy et al. 2005). The L1dwarf flare reported by de Luca et al. (2020) reached a peak flux of 6.31029 had a temperature of 1.4 keV, and evolved on timescales of 3ks. The absolute J-band magnitude of the L1dwarf is 12.8magAB. Finally, we note that Glennie et al. (2015) report a tentative association of an X-ray transient with an L1dwarf. The inferred peak luminosity is 71031 both the spectral type and distance to the source are uncertain. We can use the optical and NIR data (Table B1) to constrain the distance to a potential dwarf star. This can be combined with the peak X-ray fluxes (Table 3) to infer a peak X-ray luminosity if the source is a dwarf. For reference, the X-ray luminosity expressed in terms of peak flux ( erg s1 cm2), apparent magnitude (m), and absolute magni The peak flare flux relative to absolute magnitude is comparable for M and Ldwarfs. For the discussion, we adopt (Bochanski et al. 2011; Pecaut & Mamajek 2013) and MJ=8magAB (Pecaut & Mamajek 2013; Carnero Rosell et al. 2019), which are representative of an M4dwarf, and similarly for an L1 dwarf: Mz=14.3magAB (Carnero Rosell et al. 2019; de Luca et al. 2020) and MJ=13magAB. For two of the three candidates without hosts, XT 070618 the inferred luminosities are orders of magnitude higher than what have been observed from dwarf stars. For the last candidate without a host, XT 040610, the observations are marginally consistent with an L1dwarf because of the weak NIR constraints. The strongest constraint is in the z-band, which implies a peak luminosity of 61029 erg s 1 for a distance of 330pc. This is similar to the L1flare reported by de Luca et al. (2020). We now turn our attention to the three last SBO candidates with possible host associations: XT050925, 160220, and 140811. These have been classied as galaxies based on morphology (Table 2) but are potentially blends of two point sources,implying that the transient would be a flare from one of the foreground stars. By comparing the optical and NIR photometry with X-ray data, we nd that all three are consistent with being dwarf flares for Mdwarfs at 3 kpc or Ldwarfs at 300 pc. However, this would require them to be among the most luminous dwarf flares for either spectral type. Further more, if these sources indeed consist of two blended sources, then using the combined magnitude of the two sources as we have done above would underestimate the true X-ray flux. Dust could, in principle, obscure the emission of an optical source. However, this is challenging to reconcile with the H column density through the Milky Way (Table 4, Willingale et al. 2013). Furthermore, the observed X-ray spectra generally indicate very low levels of optical and NIR absorption (Predehl To summarize, it is possible that at least some of the bottom four candidates: XT050925, 160220, 140811, and 040610, are dwarf flares. However, we are not able to rmly conclude this The prompt GRB phase evolves on timescales of 0.3 s for short GRBs and 10 s for long GRBs (Meegan et al. 1996; von Kienlin et al. 2020). The spectra typically peak at energies in the range 1001000 keV (Goldstein et al. 2012), and extend into soft X-ray energies (Villasenor et al. 2005; Lien et al. 2016). Both types are followed by afterglows with luminosities erg s 1 at 100 s that decay on timescales of hours to days (Berger 2014; Bauer et al. 2017). The spectral shape in the 0.310 keV range is a power law with photon indices in the range 1.53 (Zhang et al. 2007; Racusin et al. the SBO candidates are related to GRBs, luminosities have to be much lower afterglows (Figure 4 of Bauer et al. 2017). For the candidates with host galaxies, it is highly unlikely that the true redshifts are substantially higher than estimated. The lack of a sharply rising prompt phase, overall light curve shapes, and spectra are also difcult to reconcile with standard on-axis GRBs. GRBs could potentially agree with some of our observations if observed far off-axis. This applies to both short (Sun et al. 2019; Xue et al. 2019; Dado & Dar 2020) and long GRBs (Dado & Dar 2019). The effects of a large viewing angle are longer duration, much lower peak luminosity, lower spectral peak, and lower fluence. The models for off-axis GRBs can be adjusted to agree qualitatively with our observations; however, many model parameters are essentially unconstrained and can be tuned to produce a very large range of observed timescales, Another source of emission is the hot cocoon, which is the result of interactions between the jet and surrounding material. This is produced in both short (Lazzati et al. 2017) and long (Suzuki & Shigeyama 2013; de Colle et al. 2018) GRBs. The predictions for both types are X-ray transients with peak luminosities around 10461048 erg s 1 and fast rise times, with the details being quite sensitive to the off-axis angle. Cocoon emission from short GRBs is expected to evolve on timescales of <30 s with temperatures of 0.22 keV. The corresponding values for long GRBs are 100 s and 0.2 keV. We note that these values agree reasonably well with the most luminous of the observed transients, XT030206, particularly for a long There are other astrophysical sources that could give rise to X-ray transients. Many of these are expected to also produce persistent optical emission. Therefore, we note that the optical constraints discussed in Section 8.1 (Equation (8)) are general and apply to any type of object, such as a companion star in an X-ray binary. It is also important to consider the Galactic latitude of the SBO candidates (Table 1). Galactic objects are generally conned to the Galactic plane, except for objects that are expected to be very close, such as late-type dwarfs. Furthermore, the prior probability of a neutron star to align The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 with an extragalactic source is <1% for a neutron star solid angle density of 1000deg2 (Ofek 2009; Sartore et al. 2010). Here, we very briefly mention a number of potential sources without exploring all details. We simply note that the following classes are able to produce some, but not all, of the observables Tidal disruption events (Rees 1988; Phinney 1989) produce soft X-ray transients that typically evolve on timescales of 10300days (Komossa 2015; Kochanek 2016). This scenario involves an ordinary star being accreted onto a supermassive black hole, which also determines the timescale. This is much longer than the SBO candidates, but disruptions of white dwarfs by intermediate mass black holes have been suggested to produce tidal disruption events on timescales of 10ks (Fernndez et al. 2019; Shen 2019; Maguire et al. 2020). X-ray binaries (Nooraee 2013; Walter et al. 2015; Martnez Nez et al. 2017) can produce a number of different types of X-ray flares. Type-I (thermonuclear) X-ray bursts (Galloway & Keek 2017; Galloway et al. 2020) have peak luminosities of erg s 1 and evolve on timescales of 10300 s, but can extend up to several thousand seconds in some cases. Ordinary accretion processes and type-II outbursts (van den Eijnden et al. 2017) generally do not produce the high dynamic ranges that characterize flares. So-called supergiant fast X-ray transients (Romano 2015; Ducci et al. 2019; Sguera et al. 2020) are 3 ks flares with dynamic ranges of 104 and peak luminosities on the order of 1037 wind accretion from OB supergiant companions. Although X-ray binaries can produce a range of X-ray transients, they are necessarily associated with bright companions challenging to reconcile with our optical and NIR data. White dwarf binaries (Mukai 2017) produce variable X-ray emission through accretion and surface nuclear burning (Schwarz et al. 2011; Morii et al. 2013; Starreld et al. 2016; Ness 2019). They can produce very soft spectra and evolve on short timescales, but typically do not flare with sufciently large dynamic ranges to be confused with SN SBOs. Magnetars (Mereghetti et al. 2015; Turolla et al. 2015; Kaspi & Beloborodov 2017) are isolated neutron stars that are characterized by very strong magnetic elds. They are known to produce high-energy transient emission, most notably so called giant flares (Hurley et al. 2005; Palmer et al. 2005). These are much harder than the SBO candidates and have light curves with a more prompt burst of 1 s followed by a much fainter decaying tail, similar to short GRBs. When a star undergoes core collapse, a shock is launched from the core. This shock propagates through the star and when it reaches the surface, a burst of soft X-rays is released. This is the rst electromagnetic signal that escapes a core-collapse SN and it carries independent information about the progenitor radius, asymmetries, and nal mass-loss history. The X-ray transients are characterized by total energies on the order of timescales of 101000 s, and soft spectra corresponding to temperatures of 0.033 keV. These values depend sensitively on the type of progenitor. RSGs generally produce slower and cooler SBOs, BSG SBOs are intermediate, and SBOs from WR progenitors are faster and hotter. We search the XMM-Newton archive for serendipitously observed SN SBOs. This archive is likely to contain more SN SBOs than any other because of the large effective area, large FoV, and 20 yr lifetime of XMM-Newton. Our search results in 12 SN SBO candidates. They are all consistent with being SBOs, but it is possible that a few are Galactic foreground dwarf stars or produced by other types of extragalactic sources. We focus on the SN SBO interpretation and investigate the inferred physical properties. In addition to the X-ray data, we analyze public wide-eld optical and NIR data and nd host galaxy candidates for nine of the sources. We estimate host redshifts of 0.10.6, except for one source at redshift 1.17. The SBO candidates have energies on the order of 1046erg, timescales ranging from minutes to hours, and soft spectra with color temperatures of 0.11 keV. Using these observables, we are able to infer progenitor and SN properties. Two candidates are probably SBOs from BSGs. A third candidate is similar but slightly slower, which could be interpreted as an asymmetric BSG SBO or breakout from a wind surrounding a more compact WR progenitor (similar to SN 2008D). There is one transient with a total energy of 81047 erg, which is higher than SBO predictions. This could potentially be the SBO from an extreme SN. There are two more sources that are likely BSG lack host galaxy identications and are more uncertain. Two candidates appear to be extreme cases of RSG or possibly yellow supergiant SBOs. Finally, candidates could either be asymmetric BSG SBOs, WR wind SBOs, or Galactic foreground contamination. Many of the SBO candidates show signs of signicant asymmetries or optically thick CSM. This is consistent with both theory and other types of observations of core-collapse SNe. Asymmetries arise spontaneously during the core collapse process and primarily affect SBO. We emphasize that this very naturally explains a broader diversity in SBO durations (up to 20% of the shock crossing time) than expected from spherical models. This additional variance agrees well with our observations. The effect of CSM on the SBO candidates is more difcult to disentangle due to the very large parameter space, which can give rise to a wide range of observables. More detailed conclusions need further modeling of the individual sources, deeper optical data, and spectroscopic redshifts. Optical follow-up data of the SNe would also ideally be obtained. This will be the subject of Future X-ray observations will detect an ever-increasing number of SN SBOs. The X-ray instrument currently most likely to detect SBOs is eROSITA (Predehl et al. 2010; Predehl 2017). We predict eROSITA to detect 2 SN SBOs per year using Equations (43) of Sapir et al. (2013) and(97) of Waxman & Katz (2017). This is a back-of-the-envelope estimate where we also attempt to correct for ISM absorption and the diversity in observed properties. We conclude by emphasizing the importance of live analyses of future X-ray data and rapid follow-up observations to fully capitalize on We are grateful to Annop Wongwathanarat for providing measures of SBO asymmetries from SN simulations, and Eleni Tsaprazi for large-scale structure density contrasts. We also thank Claes Fransson and Jens Jasche for helpful discussions , and the anonymous referee for the comments. This work was supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. This research has made use of data obtained from the 3XMM XMM-Newton Serendipitous Source Catalogue compiled by  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 the 10 institutes of the XMM-Newton Survey Science Centre selected by ESA. This research has made use of data produced by the EXTraS project, funded by the European Unions Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement no 607452. This research has made use of data obtained through the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Online Service, provided by the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. This research has made use of the SIMBAD database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France. This research the VizieR catalog access tool, CDS, Strasbourg, France. This research has made use of Aladin sky atlas developed at CDS, Strasbourg Observatory, France. This research made use of hips2ts,10 a service provided by CDS. This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Software:ADS (Kurtz et al. 2000), Aladin (Bonnarel et al. 2000; Boch & Fernique 2014), astropy (3.0.4; Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018), FTOOLS (Blackburn 1995), HEAsoft (6.26.1; Nasa High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (Heasarc), 2014), Le PHARE (2.2; Arnouts et al. 1999; Ilbert et al. 2006), matplotlib (2.0.2; Hunter 2007), numpy (1.13.1; van der Walt et al. 2011), SAOImage DS9 (8.1; Joye & Mandel 2003), SAS (18.0.0; Gabriel et al. 2004), scipy (1.1.0; Virtanen et al. 2020). SIMBAD (Wenger et al. 2000), VizieR (Ochsenbein et al. 2000), XSPEC (12.10.1f; Arnaud 1996). Searching the XMM-Newton Observations We use two different algorithms to search for SN SBOs in archival XMM-Newton data. The aim of both search algorithms is solely to identify X-ray transients. Rejecting spurious detections and careful performed in a subsequent stage (Section 2.2). For these reasons, we do not attempt to correct for instrumental effects such as vignetting, dead time, or chip gaps in the transient detection process. Some details related to data preparation are also not considered, such as extraction regions falling outside of CCDs and nearby sources located within background regions. These effects are managed in the proper data reduction (Section 4) for the nal SBO candidates. Notably, we do not exclude periods of high background when searching for transients because transients can occur during these times and could, identied. The high background is produced by protons in the Earths magnetosphere and depends on the satellite altitude and level of solar activity (Carter & Read 2007). These proton flares affect 30%40% of the total XMM-Newton observation time. Excluding these time periods increases the S/N of typical persistent sources, but this is not true for a transient source that is only detectable during a background flare. The challenge is to distinguish an interesting astrophysical background flares. This distinction is difcult to do solely using light curves, but can easily be done in images because transient source appears as a point. 10 https://alasky.u-strasbg.fr/hips-image-services/hips2ts A.1. Custom Transient Source Finder Our custom algorithm starts from the Processing Pipeline Subsystem (PPS) event lists and nds all variable sources. We use all 11,500 public observations with EPIC imaging archived at HEASARC as of 2019 November 11. Since we are expecting faint and soft sources, we combine the data from all EPIC cameras (Strder et al. 2001; Turner et al. 2001) and restrict the The rst step of the search algorithm is to bin the event list along the spatial and temporal dimensions. Effectively, this creates a series of images (a data cube) for each observation , which is divided into three-dimensional cells with two spatial 2020arcsec2, which is chosen to contain the cores of the PSFs of EPIC. The encircled energy at a radius of 10 is around 60% for EPIC. The PSF wings are much broader and can be neglected. The temporal binning is performed at ve different timescales ranging from 100 to 10,000 s with logarithmic spacing. To mitigate the effects of the discretizations in space and time, we repeat the binning by shifting the grid by one-half of the bin size along each dimension. The total number of combinations introduced by the shifts and temporal binning at different timescales is 40 (2225). This means that 40 data cubes are created for each observation. The second step is to nd transients in the data cubes. To do this, we perform a simplied statistical test for variability in each cell relative to the grid cells before and after. Before and after in this context refers to the cells at the same spatial position, but one bin earlier and later along the temporal dimension, respectively. Importantly, the transient detection algorithm must be able to handle the highly temporally varying background and reject slowly varying sources. For each cell, we rst need to estimate the expected persistent source flux at the position. This is done by linearly interpolating the background-subtracted fluxes of the cells before and after in time. The background subtraction in the before and after cells are performed by subtracting the average of the four spatially neighboring grid cells at the respective times. To prevent over subtraction (negative counts), we simply force the expected source flux in the current bin to be at least 1 count. This provides the expected persistent source flux at position. To this flux, we add the average background of the four spatially neighboring pixels. This sum is the expected total count rate in the current cell. Finally, we assume the count rate to be Poissonian and compute the p value to obtain the observed count rate given the expected rate. This pvalue should capture any variability in excess of linear variability in time, while also being insensitive to the highly temporally varying To separate the variable sources, we perform a cut based on the variability measure. As a test statistic, we rescale the pvalue and use the negative log-likelihood ln(p). We select a limiting statistic of 25, which leaves a very low probability of noise passing the lter. This cut leaves 380 detections, which are investigated by eye in subsequent steps. A.2. Finding Transients in 3XMM-DR8 The XMM-Newton Survey Science Centre routinely pub lishes catalogs of detected sources, the latest being 3XMM DR8 at the time of writing. This catalog contains observations from 2000 February 3 through 2017 November 30 and contains  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 775,153 detections of 531,454 unique sources. The rst step toward identifying SBOs is analyzing the source light curves. 3XMM-DR8 includes light curves, but those are not suited for fast transients because they were created with a common bin width with a minimum number of photons in every bin (Section 5.2 of Watson et al. 2009). Consequently, the time interval before the rise of a transient source (and possibly also after the transient has faded) results in an increased common bin width. This increase could drastically reduce the sensitivity for short, bright, flare-like transients. For these reasons, we decide to construct custom light curves for our SBO search.11 We use the positions from the 3XMM-DR8 catalog of identied sources and generate light curves for all 550,614 detections that are more than 15 outside of the Galactic plane. We do not search the Galactic plane because we found no candidates in this region using our custom nder and because robust source identication is very difcult in dense elds. The increased X-ray absorption close to the Galactic plane also drastically reduces the possibility of detecting SBOs. Furthermore, we discard very faint sources by omitting all objects with a detection likelihood reported by 3XMM-DR8 as less than 10. This likelihood is based on the likelihood ratio described by Cash (1979). The likelihood is , where P is the probability of the detection occurring by chance (formally, hypothesis; Section 4.4.3 of Watson et al. 2009). To create the light curves, we download the XMM-Newton PPS event lists and combine all exposures of the EPIC pn, MOS1, and MOS2 cameras within each observation and limit the energy range to 0.310 keV. From the combined event list, we extract source events from a circular region with a radius of 20 centered on the source position (taken from 3XMM-DR8). Background events are then extracted from an annular region centered on the source with an inner radius 50 and an outer radius of 100. The light curves are binned such that each bin contains 25 counts from the source region. This binning requirement ignores the background count rate and results in bins with different temporal widths. The reason for choosing this dynamic-binning approach is to be able to effectively capture the large variations in flux for transient sources. The background events are binned to the same temporal bins as the source light curves and are then subtracted from the source to The next step is to nd all transient sources. We identify sources showing transient-like behavior by requiring that they fulll at least one of the following heuristics: 1. The ratio of the maximum background-subtracted flux bin over the 50th flux percentile (i.e., percentile of the bins weighted by time for this individual light curve) is larger than 3, while the signal-to-background ratio (S/B) is higher than 10 at the time of peak flux. 2. Same as above, but with a peak flux a factor of 5 above the 50th percentile and an S/B of at least 3. 3. At least 10ks of the background-subtracted light curve is within 1 of 0counts s1. Moreover, at least one bin has a source flux higher than 0.05counts s1 with an S/B The combination of all heuristics is constructed to distinguish flare-like sources while being insensitive to background flares and inaccurate background subtraction. All heuristics are then also reevaluated with the modication that the time intervals when the background count rate is higher than 0.05counts s1 are discarded.12 Approximately 11,000 sources pass these criteria and are investigated by eye at a subsequent stage. This can be compared to 3XMM-DR8, which classies 5934 sources as variable. The difference in the number of variable sources is not surprising because of our simplied background treatment, which results in a very large number of sources being classied as variable due to inaccurately subtracted background flares. Furthermore, these numbers are not strictly comparable because we apply a number of lters and have dened variability differently. Table B1 provides the optical and NIR data for the candidate host galaxies. The multi-band optical data are used for the redshift SED tting. Specically, we only use optical data from a single survey for each source to avoid systematic uncertain ties between different surveys. It is not possible to perform reliable SED ts using only NIR data, but the NIR data are still useful since they provide an important check for the inferred 11 We note that the Exploring the X-ray Transient and variable Sky (EXTraS) project (de Luca et al. 2016) aim to provide more detailed temporal data products for all XMM-Newton sources. However, aperiodic short-term variability (EXTraS Working Package 2) only includes data that were publicly available by 2012 December 31 (corresponding to 3XMM-DR4). The EXTraS light curves are also intended for general variable behavior and are not optimized for fast and possibly faint transients. For these reasons, we only briefly inspected the EXTraS WP2 catalog, and we nd no objects that were not already detected by our other methods. 12 We note that the limit of 0.05counts s1 refers to the rate of our custom background light curves. These light curves are different from the background light curves in the standard XMM-Newton data reduction, which are customarily dened as the total rate in the entire FoV within 1012 keV for the pn CCD and above 10 keV for the MOS CCDs. Note. All magnitudes are converted (Hewett et al. 2006; Blanton & Roweis 2007) to the AB magnitude system (Oke & Gunn 1983). All detections use either Petrosian (1976) or Kron (1980) magnitudes, which are suitable for extended sources. We note that the upper limits are given for different thresholds: 3 (2MASS), 5 (Pan-STARRS and VHS), S/N of 10 (DES), and 10 (SkyMapper). The limits are for point sources except for the DES limits, which are for apertures of 1 95. For reference, Metcalfe et al. (2013) nd that galaxies have a 50% completeness about 0.4magAB brighter than stars using Pan-STARRS observations. Filters of different telescopes are also slightly different. References. Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 16 (SDSS-IV DR16, York et al. 2000; Ahumada et al. 2019), Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS, Skrutskie et al. 2006), Kilo-Degree Survey Data Release 3 (KiDS-ESO-DR3, de Jong et al. 2013, 2017), Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy (VISTA) Kilo-degree Infrared Galaxy Survey Data Release 2 (VIKING DR2, Edge et al. 2013), Dark Energy Survey Data Release 1 (DES DR1, Abbott et al. 2018), VISTA Hemisphere Survey Data Release 4.1 (VHS DR4.1, McMahon et al. 2013), Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System Data Release 2 (Pan STARRS DR2, Chambers et al. 2016), SkyMapper (Wolf et al. 2018).  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Table C1 provides statistic measures for all spectral ts. We note that the number of photons (essentially the degrees of freedom) is very limited in some cases, especially for the time resolved spectra. This introduces substantial variance in the Note. Quantities denoted by C are t statistics and G are goodness measures (Section 5.1). The subscripts are BB for blackbody and PL for power law, and rst (1) and second (2) interval for time-resolved spectra. Quantities without subscript integers are time-integrated values. DoF refers to the degrees of freedom.  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0427-5592 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0065-2933 Abbott, T. M. C., Abdalla, F. B., Allam, S., et al. 2018, ApJS, 239, 18 Abelln, F. J., Indebetouw, R., Marcaide, J. M., et al. 2017, ApJL, 842, L24 Ahumada, R., Allende Prieto, C., Almeida, A., et al. 2019, arXiv:1912.02905 Alam, S., Albareti, F. D., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2015, ApJS, 219, 12 Alp, D., Larsson, J., Maeda, K., et al. 2019, ApJ, 882, 22 Arnaud, K. A. 1996, in ASP Conf. Ser. 101, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems V, ed. G. H. Jacoby & J. Barnes (San Francisco, CA: Arnouts, S., Cristiani, S., Moscardini, L., et al. 1999, MNRAS, 310, 540 Arnouts, S., Walcher, C. J., le Fvre, O., et al. 2007, A&A, 476, 137 Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipcz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, Balberg, S., & Loeb, A. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 1715 Barthelmy, S. D., Barbier, L. M., Cummings, J. R., et al. 2005, SSRv, 120, 143 Bauer, F. E., Treister, E., Schawinski, K., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 4841 Benz, A. O., & Gdel, M. 2010, ARA&A, 48, 241 Berger, E. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 43 Blackburn, J. K. 1995, in ASP Conf. Ser. 77, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, ed. R. A. Shaw, H. E. Payne, & J. J. E. Hayes (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 367 Blanton, M. R., Hogg, D. W., Bahcall, N. A., et al. 2003, ApJ, 592, 819 Blanton, M. R., & Roweis, S. 2007, AJ, 133, 734 Blinnikov, S., Lundqvist, P., Bartunov, O., Nomoto, K., & Iwamoto, K. 2000, Boch, T., & Fernique, P. 2014, in ASP Conf. Ser. 485, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXIII, ed. N. Manset & P. Forshay (San Bochanski, J. J., Hawley, S. L., & West, A. A. 2011, AJ, 141, 98 Bonnarel, F., Fernique, P., Bienaym, O., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 33 Bruzual, G., & Charlot, S. 2003, MNRAS, 344, 1000 Caballero-Garca, M. D., imon, V., Jelnek, M., et al. 2015, MNRAS, Calzavara, A. J., & Matzner, C. D. 2004, MNRAS, 351, 694 Calzetti, D., Kinney, A. L., & Storchi-Bergmann, T. 1994, ApJ, 429, 582 Carnero Rosell, A., Santiago, B., dal Ponte, M., et al. 2019, MNRAS, Carter, J. A., & Read, A. M. 2007, A&A, 464, 1155 Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016, arXiv:1612.05560 Chevalier, R. A., & Fransson, C. 2008, ApJL, 683, L135 Coleman, G. D., Wu, C. C., & Weedman, D. W. 1980, ApJS, 43, 393 Cook, B. A., Williams, P. K. G., & Berger, E. 2014, ApJ, 785, 10 Couch, S. M. 2017, RSPTA, 375, 20160271 Couch, S. M., Pooley, D., Wheeler, J. C., & Milosavljevi, M. 2011, ApJ, Dado, S., & Dar, A. 2019, ApJL, 884, L44 Dado, S., & Dar, A. 2020, PhRvD, 101, 063008 Dalya, G., Frei, Z., Galgoczi, G., Raffai, P., & de Souza, R. S. 2016, yCat, VII/ de Colle, F., Lu, W., Kumar, P., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., & Smoot, G. 2018, de Jong, J. T. A., Verdoes Kleijn, G. A., Erben, T., et al. 2017, A&A, de Jong, J. T. A., Verdoes Kleijn, G. A., Kuijken, K. H., & Valentijn, E. A. de Luca, A., Salvaterra, R., Tiengo, A., et al. 2016, The Universe of Digital Sky Surveys, Vol. 42 (Cham: Springer), 291 de Luca, A., Stelzer, B., Burgasser, A. J., et al. 2020, A&A, 634, L13 Ducci, L., Romano, P., Ji, L., & Santangelo, A. 2019, A&A, 631, A135 Edge, A., Sutherland, W., Kuijken, K., et al. 2013, Msngr, 154, 32 Ensman, L., & Burrows, A. 1992, ApJ, 393, 742 Ergon, M., Sollerman, J., Fraser, M., et al. 2014, A&A, 562, A17 Favata, F., Reale, F., Micela, G., et al. 2000, A&A, 353, 987 Fernndez, R., Margalit, B., & Metzger, B. D. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 259 Gabriel, C., Denby, M., Fyfe, D. J., et al. 2004, in ASP Conf. Ser. 314, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) XIII, ed. F. Ochsenbein, M. G. Allen, & D. Egret (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 759 Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 616, A1 Galloway, D. K., in t Zand, J. J. M., Chenevez, J., et al. 2020, ApJS, in press Galloway, D. K., & Keek, L. 2017, arXiv:1712.06227 Glennie, A., Jonker, P. G., Fender, R. P., Nagayama, T., & Pretorius, M. L. Goldstein, A., Burgess, J. M., Preece, R. D., et al. 2012, ApJS, 199, 19 Grefenstette, B. W., Fryer, C. L., Harrison, F. A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 19 Greiner, J., Hartmann, D. H., Voges, W., et al. 2000, A&A, 353, 998 Gdel, M. 2004, A&ARv, 12, 71 Gdel, M., & Naz, Y. 2009, A&ARv, 17, 309 Hewett, P. C., Warren, S. J., Leggett, S. K., & Hodgkin, S. T. 2006, MNRAS, Hunter, J. D. 2007, CSE, 9, 90 Hurley, K., Boggs, S. E., Smith, D. M., et al. 2005, Natur, 434, 1098 Ilbert, O., Arnouts, S., McCracken, H. J., et al. 2006, A&A, 457, 841 Ilbert, O., Capak, P., Salvato, M., et al. 2009, ApJ, 690, 1236 Ilbert, O., Tresse, L., Zucca, E., et al. 2005, A&A, 439, 863 Ito, H., Levinson, A., & Nagataki, S. 2020, MNRAS, 492, 1902 Janka, H.-T., Melson, T., & Summa, A. 2016, ARNPS, 66, 341 Jansen, F., Lumb, D., Altieri, B., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L1 Jones, D. H., Read, M. A., Saunders, W., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 399, 683 Jonker, P. G., Glennie, A., Heida, M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 14 Joye, W. A., & Mandel, E. 2003, in ASP Conf. Ser. 295, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XII, ed. H. E. Payne, R. I. Jedrzejewski, & R. N. Hook (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 489 Kaspi, V. M., & Beloborodov, A. M. 2017, ARA&A, 55, 261 Katz, B., Budnik, R., & Waxman, E. 2010, ApJ, 716, 781 Katz, B., Sapir, N., & Waxman, E. 2012, ApJ, 747, 147 Kinney, A. L., Calzetti, D., Bohlin, R. C., et al. 1996, ApJ, 467, 38 Klein, R. I., & Chevalier, R. A. 1978, ApJL, 223, L109 Kochanek, C. S. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 371 Komossa, S. 2015, JHEAp, 7, 148 Kron, R. G. 1980, ApJS, 43, 305 Kuijken, K., Heymans, C., Dvornik, A., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A2 Kurtz, M. J., Eichhorn, G., Accomazzi, A., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 41 Lampton, M., Margon, B., & Bowyer, S. 1976, ApJ, 208, 177 Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 147 Lavaux, G., Jasche, J., & Leclercq, F. 2019, arXiv:1909.06396 Lazzati, D., Lpez-Cmara, D., Cantiello, M., et al. 2017, ApJL, 848, L6 Levinson, A., & Nakar, E. 2019, arXiv:1909.10288 Lien, A., Sakamoto, T., Barthelmy, S. D., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, 7 Loyd, R. O. P., France, K., Youngblood, A., et al. 2018a, ApJ, 867, 71 Loyd, R. O. P., Shkolnik, E. L., Schneider, A. C., et al. 2018b, ApJ, 867, 70 Madsen, K. K., Beardmore, A. P., Forster, K., et al. 2017, AJ, 153, 2 Maguire, K., Eracleous, M., Jonker, P. G., MacLeod, M., & Rosswog, S. 2020, Martnez-Nez, S., Kretschmar, P., Bozzo, E., et al. 2017, SSRv, 212, 59 Mason, K. O., Breeveld, A., Much, R., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L36 Matzner, C. D., & McKee, C. F. 1999, ApJ, 510, 379 McCray, R. 1993, ARA&A, 31, 175 McMahon, R. G., Banerji, M., Gonzalez, E., et al. 2013, Msngr, 154, 35 Meegan, C. A., Pendleton, G. N., Briggs, M. S., et al. 1996, ApJS, 106, 65 Menon, A., & Heger, A. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 4649 Menon, A., Utrobin, V., & Heger, A. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 438 Mereghetti, S., Pons, J. A., & Melatos, A. 2015, SSRv, 191, 315 Metcalfe, N., Farrow, D. J., Cole, S., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 1825 Modjaz, M., Li, W., Butler, N., et al. 2009, ApJ, 702, 226 Morii, M., Tomida, H., Kimura, M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 118 Mukai, K. 2017, PASP, 129, 062001 Mller, B. 2016, PASA, 33, e048 Nakar, E., & Sari, R. 2010, ApJ, 725, 904 Nasa High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (Heasarc) 2014, HEAsoft: Unied Release of FTOOLS and XANADU v6.21.1, Astrophysics Source Code Library, ascl:1408.004 Ness, J.-U. 2019, AdSpR, in press (doi:10.1016/j.asr.2019.09.002) Nishizawa, A. J., Hsieh, B.-C., Tanaka, M., & Takata, T. 2020, arXiv:2003. Nooraee, N. 2013, MNRAS, 428, 205 Novara, G., Esposito, P., Tiengo, A., et al. 2020, arXiv:2004.10665 Ochsenbein, F., Bauer, P., & Marcout, J. 2000, A&AS, 143, 23  The Astrophysical Journal, 896:39 (23pp), 2020 June 10 Ofek, E. O. 2009, PASP, 121, 814 Oke, J. B., & Gunn, J. E. 1983, ApJ, 266, 713 Osten, R. A., Godet, O., Drake, S., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721, 785 Osten, R. A., Kowalski, A., Drake, S. A., et al. 2016, ApJ, 832, 174 Pallavicini, R., Tagliaferri, G., & Stella, L. 1990, A&A, 228, 403 Palmer, D. M., Barthelmy, S., Gehrels, N., et al. 2005, Natur, 434, 1107 Pandey, J. C., & Singh, K. P. 2008, MNRAS, 387, 1627 Pecaut, M. J., & Mamajek, E. E. 2013, ApJS, 208, 9 Petrosian, V. 1976, ApJL, 210, L53 Phinney, E. S. 1989, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 136, The Center of the Galaxy, ed. M. Morris (Dordrecht: Kluwer), 543 Piro, A. L., Chang, P., & Weinberg, N. N. 2010, ApJ, 708, 598 Plucinsky, P. P., Beardmore, A. P., Foster, A., et al. 2017, A&A, 597, A35 Polletta, M., Tajer, M., Maraschi, L., et al. 2007, ApJ, 663, 81 Predehl, P. 2017, AN, 338, 159 Predehl, P., Andritschke, R., Bhringer, H., et al. 2010, Proc. SPIE, 7732, Predehl, P., & Schmitt, J. H. M. M. 1995, A&A, 500, 459 Pye, J. P., Rosen, S., Fyfe, D., & Schrder, A. C. 2015, A&A, 581, A28 Racusin, J. L., Liang, E. W., Burrows, D. N., et al. 2009, ApJ, 698, 43 Rees, M. J. 1988, Natur, 333, 523 Robrade, J., Poppenhaeger, K., & Schmitt, J. H. M. M. 2010, A&A, 513, A12 Robrade, J., & Schmitt, J. H. M. M. 2005, A&A, 435, 1073 Romano, P. 2015, JHEAp, 7, 126 Rosen, S. R., Webb, N. A., Watson, M. G., et al. 2016, A&A, 590, A1 Sapir, N., & Halbertal, D. 2014, ApJ, 796, 145 Sapir, N., Katz, B., & Waxman, E. 2011, ApJ, 742, 36 Sapir, N., Katz, B., & Waxman, E. 2013, ApJ, 774, 79 Sartore, N., Ripamonti, E., Treves, A., & Turolla, R. 2010, A&A, 510, A23 Schwarz, G. J., Ness, J.-U., Osborne, J. P., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 31 Sguera, V., Sidoli, L., Bird, A. J., Paizis, A., & Bazzano, A. 2020, MNRAS, Shen, R.-F. 2019, ApJL, 871, L17 Shen, S., Mo, H. J., White, S. D. M., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 343, 978 Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163 Smartt, S. J. 2009, ARA&A, 47, 63 Soderberg, A. M., Berger, E., Page, K. L., et al. 2008, Natur, 453, 469 Starreld, S., Iliadis, C., & Hix, W. R. 2016, PASP, 128, 051001 Strder, L., Briel, U., Dennerl, K., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L18 Sun, H., Li, Y., Zhang, B.-B., et al. 2019, ApJ, 886, 129 Suzuki, A., & Shigeyama, T. 2010, ApJL, 717, L154 Suzuki, A., & Shigeyama, T. 2013, ApJL, 764, L12 Svirski, G., & Nakar, E. 2014, ApJ, 788, 113 Tachibana, Y., & Miller, A. A. 2018, PASP, 130, 128001 Taddia, F., Sollerman, J., Fremling, C., et al. 2019, A&A, 621, A71 Turner, M. J. L., Abbey, A., Arnaud, M., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L27 Turolla, R., Zane, S., & Watts, A. L. 2015, RPPh, 78, 116901 Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., et al. 2019, A&A, van den Eijnden, J., Bagnoli, T., Degenaar, N., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 466, van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CSE, 13, 22 Verner, D. A., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1995, A&AS, 109, 125 Vikhlinin, A. 1998, ApJL, 505, L123 Villasenor, J. S., Lamb, D. Q., Ricker, G. R., et al. 2005, Natur, 437, 855 Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, von Kienlin, A., Meegan, C. A., Paciesas, W. S., et al. 2020, ApJ, 893, 46 Walter, R., Lutovinov, A. A., Bozzo, E., & Tsygankov, S. S. 2015, A&ARv, Watson, M. G., Schrder, A. C., Fyfe, D., et al. 2009, A&A, 493, 339 in Handbook of Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti & P. Murdin (Cham: Springer), 967 Weaver, T. A. 1976, ApJS, 32, 233 Wenger, M., Ochsenbein, F., Egret, D., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 9 Williams, P. K. G., Cook, B. A., & Berger, E. 2014, ApJ, 785, 9 Willingale, R., Starling, R. L. C., Beardmore, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., & OBrien, P. T. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 394 Wilms, J., Allen, A., & McCray, R. 2000, ApJ, 542, 914 Wolf, C., Meisenheimer, K., Rix, H. W., et al. 2003, A&A, 401, 73 Wolf, C., Onken, C. A., Luvaul, L. C., et al. 2018, PASA, 35, e010 Wongwathanarat, A., Mller, E., & Janka, H.-T. 2015, A&A, 577, A48 Woosley, S. E., Pinto, P. A., Martin, P. G., & Weaver, T. A. 1987, ApJ, Wright, A. H., Hildebrandt, H., Kuijken, K., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A34 Xue, Y. Q., Zheng, X. C., Li, Y., et al. 2019, Natur, 568, 198 Yang, G., Brandt, W. N., Zhu, S. F., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 4721 Yaqoob, T. 1998, ApJ, 500, 893 York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, J. E. J., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579 Zhang, B.-B., Liang, E.-W., & Zhang, B. 2007, ApJ, 666, 1002 The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1  2021. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac052d Thermal Emission and Radioactive Lines, but No Pulsar, in the Broadband X-Ray 1 Department of Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, and The Oskar Klein Centre, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden; dalp@kth.se 2 The Oskar Klein Centre, Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden Received 2021 March 3; revised 2021 May 24; accepted 2021 May 24; published 2021 July 29 Supernova 1987A offers a unique opportunity to study an evolving supernova in unprecedented detail over several decades. The X-ray emission is dominated by interactions between the ejecta and the circumstellar medium, primarily the equatorial ring (ER). We analyze 3.3Ms of NuSTAR data obtained between 2012 and 2020, and two decades of XMM-Newton data. Since 2013, the flux below 2keV has declined, the 38keV flux has increased but has started to flatten, and the emission above 10keV has remained nearly constant. The spectra are well described by a model with three thermal shock components. Two components at 0.3 and 0.9keV are associated with dense clumps in the ER, and a 4keV component may be a combination of emission from diffuse gas in the ER and the surrounding low-density H II region. We disfavor models that involve nonthermal X-ray emission and place constraints on nonthermal components, but cannot rmly exclude an underlying power law. Radioactive lines 1034ergs1, and <15% of the 1020keV flux is The 3565keV luminosity limit on the compact object is 2 pulsed. Considering previous limits, we conclude that there are currently no indications of a compact object, aside from a possible hint of dust heated by a neutron star in recent ALMA images. Unied Astronomy Thesaurus concepts: Circumstellar matter (241); Core-collapse supernovae (304); Cosmic ray sources (328); Explosive nucleosynthesis (503); Shocks (2086); Supernova remnants (1667) Supernova (SN) 1987A is the closest observed SN in more than four centuries (Arnett et al. 1989; McCray 1993; McCray & Fransson 2016). It is a core-collapse SN located in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) and was rst detected on 1987 February 23. The progenitor star, Sanduleak69 202(Sanduleak 1970), was identied as a B3Ia blue supergiant(West et al. 1987). The progenitor shaped the circumstellar medium (CSM) around SN1987A and produced a triple-ring structure (Wampler et al. 1990; Burrows et al. 1995). This structure consists of two larger explanations for this based on interacting winds (Blondin & Lundqvist 1993; Martin & Arnett 1995), binary mergers (Morris & Podsiadlowski 2007; Menon & Heger 2017; Utrobin et al. 2021), or rapid rotation (Chita et al. 2008) have been proposed. The three forming an hourglass-like shape (Chevalier & Dwarkadas 1995; Larsson et al. 2019). They are nearly circular but appear elliptical because they are viewed at an inclination of 3845 (Crotts & Heathcote 2000; Tziamtzis et al. 2011). The X-ray emission that we study in this paper is primarily due to the interaction with this complex CSM. rings and a smaller equatorial At early times, the ejecta from SN1987A propagated through a low-density H II region inside of the ER, which gave rise to faint radio and X-ray emission (Staveley-Smith et al. 1992; Chevalier & Dwarkadas 1995; Hasinger et al. 1996). After approximately 3000 days, the ejecta started interacting with the denser ER. This interaction produced a signicant brightening in all wave bands (Bouchet et al. 2006; Park et al. 2006; Grningsson et al. 2008; Ng et al. 2008; Dwek et al. 2010). Notably, high-density clumps inside the ER produced bright optical hotspots (Sonneborn et al. 1998; Lawrence et al. 2000). More recent observations show that the optical emission is declining and that new hotspots have appeared outside of the ER (Fransson et al. 2015; Larsson et al. 2019). Furthermore, the infrared (IR) emission has been declining since 9000days (Arendt et al. 2016, 2020), X-rays below 2keV started decreasing at 10,000days (Frank et al. 2016; Ravi 2019), and the radio blast wave is now reaccelerating (Cendes et al. 2018). These observations all show that most of the blast wave is now propagating past the ER, while the ER is being dissolved. In addition to the long monitoring of SN1987A in radio, optical, and X-rays, a potential GeV detection has recently been reported using Fermi data (Malyshev et al. 2019; Petruk et al. 2019). A major uncertainty is if the emission is truly originating from SN1987A because the angular resolution of Fermi insufcient to resolve SN1987A from other nearby sources. If associated with SN1987A, the data suggest an increase in the GeV flux by a factor of 2 between 2010 and 2018, which could indicate efcient cosmic-ray acceleration in the shocks (Dwarkadas The X-ray emission produced by the interactions with the ER has been extensively studied in the literature (Burrows et al. 2000; Michael et al. 2002; Park et al. 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2011; Zhekov et al. 2005, 2006, 2009, 2010; Haberl et al. 2006; Dewey et al. 2008, 2012; Heng et al. 2008; Racusin et al. 2009; Sturm et al. 2009, 2010; Maggi et al. 2012; Helder et al. 2013; Orlando et al. 2015, 2019; Frank et al. 2016; Miceli et al. 2019; Bray et al. 2020; Greco et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021). For brevity, we only summarize the most relevant ndings from the previous studies. The ER is resolved by Chandra, which allows for studies of the morphology and expansion velocity. Comparisons with other wavelengths show that X-rays below 2keV are generally more strongly correlated with optical, whereas harder X-rays better follow the radio evolution. The X-ray emission has been interpreted as predominantly or completely of thermal origin.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 The detection of the FeK line complex clearly shows that thermal emission is important at energies up to 10keV. Thermal models for the X-ray spectra require multiple components of different temperatures. This is not unexpected given the complex structure of the CSM around SN1987A, but it is difcult to uniquely associate each spectral component with one of the many possible emission regions. The most likely origins for the X-ray emission are: the dense ER clumps, the diffuse ER, the H II region, the reverse shock propagating into the ejecta, and reflected shocks off the ER clumps. However, it remains uncertain if there is a contribution from a nonthermal component. Possible origins for an additional component are shock-accelerated electrons, high-temperature freefree emission, or a pulsar wind nebula (PWN). In addition to the thermal emission, there are a number of lines that result from radioactive decay (Diehl 2018). Explosive nucleosynthesis in SN explosions produces unstable proton rich isotopes that decay by electron capture. This gives rise to different types of radioactive lines, one of which is nuclear de excitation lines. The most prominent example at current epochs is the pair of lines at 67.87 and 78.32keV, which are produced Boggs et al. 2015). Technically, Ti , and these lines are emitted when the Sc44 nucleus de-excite to its ground state (Cameron & Singh 1999). However, these lines are conventionally referred to as the Ti is produced in the SN explosion and serves as an important probe of the explosion physics (e.g., Janka et al. 2017). From its high-energy nuclear decay lines, it is possible redshift, which is a measure of the explosion asymmetries, as well as the initial advantages of these nuclear radioactive lines are that emission escapes the ejecta practically unattenuated at current epochs (Alp et al. 2018a) and that the emission is proportional to the mass. The proportionality constant is known through the 85yr lifetime (Ahmad et al. 2006) and is not dependent on any shock dynamics or radiation reprocessing. Another type of radioactive line is electron capture K-shell emission lines (Leising 2001). This is a result of the electron capture process leaving a vacancy in the K-shell. When the vacancy is lled by electron de-excitation, a characteristic X-ray below 10keV is emitted. The chain (Junde 2008), which emits Mn are produced in SNe, but Co55 lifetime of only 25hr. Therefore, we will henceforth refer to of 3.9yr and its daughter isotope Mn around 5.9keV. Furthermore, the daughter isotope of , emits lines around 4.1keV. Detections or strong limits on these lines would constrain nucleosynthesis yields and absorption properties of the ejecta, which in turn are related to the explosion mechanism and progenitor properties. The line energies and, in particular, the electron capture decay rates are often treated as constants, but depend on the level of ionization (Mochizuki et al. 1999; Laming 2001; Motizuki & Kumagai 2004). This is primarily signicant for ionization to H-like, He-like, or completely ionized states. The inner ejecta where the bulk of the radioactive elements reside are not expected to be highly ionized (Jerkstrand et al. 2011). Therefore, the standard values measured for neutral atoms can be applied to the radioactive line energies and decay rates Neutrinos were detected from the core collapse of SN1987A (Hirata et al. 1987), which signaled the formation of a neutron star. No further unequivocal evidence for the neutron star has been presented, and it remains uncertain if it collapsed further into a black hole. Numerous searches have been performed (Graves et al. 2005; Manchester 2007; Alp et al. 2018a, 2018b; Esposito et al. 2018; Cigan et al. 2019; Page et al. 2020; Greco et al. 2021), but only tentative indications have been found. Cigan et al. (2019) reported a possible sign of localized energy input by a neutron star in a 679GHz ALMA image. They suggested heating by thermal surface neutron star emission (Alp et al. 2018b; Page et al. 2020) or the emergence of a PWN, which was also suggested by Zanardo et al. (2014). Recently, Greco et al. (2021) interpreted the X-ray emission above 10keV as indications of a PWN. In this paper, we study new NuSTAR data from 2020, together with archival NuSTAR data from 2012 to 2014 (Boggs et al. 2015; Greco et al. 2021). To extend the energy range and time span, we also include archival XMM-Newton observations spanning nearly two decades. These XMM Newton observations have previously been analyzed in a number of separate studies focused on different aspects of the data (Haberl et al. 2006; Heng et al. 2008; Sturm et al. 2010; Maggi et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2021.) The main focus is the interpretation of the 0.4524keV spectrum and a possible contribution from a nonthermal component, which could be connected to the GeV emission or a PWN. We analyze the radioactive Ti place limits on the radioactive Mn Newton. NuSTAR is also used to constrain the pulsed fraction and put a deep upper limit on the contribution from a compact object. Finally, we put the compact object limit into context by comparing it with previous multiwavelength observations. observations constituting the main data set in Section 2 and the methods used for the analysis in Section 3. The results are contained in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5. We provide a the conclusions in Section 6. Two independent parts of the analysis are separated into appendices. In Appendix A, we search for pulsed emission in the 20122014 NuSTAR data. We analyze the radioactive K-shell lines from using 20002003 XMM-Newton data in Appendix B. Finally, we explore the calibration uncertainties of NuSTAR and XMM-Newton in Appendices C and D. 2. Observations and Data Reduction We focus on the NuSTAR (Harrison et al. 2013) observa tions of SN1987A but include XMM-Newton (Jansen et al. 2001) data to extend the lower energy bound to 0.45keV and resolve the X-ray line emission. Accurate modeling of the line emission is important for the interpretation of the entire X-ray Including XMM-Newton data also extends the temporal baseline for flux measurements back to 2003. We use XMM-Newton instead of Chandra primarily because we do not need to spatially resolve the ER. Instead, we prioritize the better photon statistics provided by the larger effective area of XMM-Newton. For the data reduction and analysis, we use  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Note. The net source counts in each of the two NuSTAR modules are given by CA and CB. Counts are given for two different energy ranges as indicated by the subscripts. The observations with 0 counts are results of no bins (after binning to a minimum of 25 counts per bin) passing the energy range requirement as implemented by the ignore task in XSPEC due to short exposures. The NuSTAR telescope has an energy range of 378.4keV resolution of 18 (FWHM). The spatial resolution is insufcient to resolve the ER (1) but clearly separates SN1987A from any other sources. The energy resolution has an FWHM response of 0.4keV at 10keV and 0.9keV at 60keV. This spectral resolution allows for the separation of isolated lines and line complexes from the continuum but does not resolve ner structures or crowded spectral regions. NuSTAR has two mirror assemblies and two corresponding focal plane CCD modules (FPMs), referred to as FPMA and FPMB. The two parallel setups are practically identical but all data are analyzed separately and only combined for presentation purposes. We use all on-axis NuSTAR observations of SN1987A (Table 1), which constitute a total exposure time of 3.3Ms. The majority of the data are from 2012 to 2014. These were previously lines (Boggs et al. 2015) and the used to study the radioactive Ti continuum (Greco et al. 2021). To complement these data, we obtained new observations in 2020 May, which allow us to study the recent temporal evolution. There are 17 individual observations in total, but these constitute eight groups of observations that are quasi-simultaneous (within two weeks; see Table 1). Henceforth, the observations within each group are treated as simultaneous, but the data are not combined except for presentation purposes. The NuSTAR data reduction largely follows procedures. To reduce the data, we use NuSTARDAS 1.9.2 and NuSTAR CALDB version 20200726. First, calibrations and lters are applied using the nupipeline task. The exposures are ltered for passages through the South Atlantic Anomaly. This is a trade-off between exposure time and background. We check the SAA lter reports and use the options saacalc=1, saamode=strict, and tentacle=yes. Spectra are then generated using the standard task nupro ducts. Source counts are extracted from a circular region centered on SN1987A, shown in Figure 1. We choose a radius of 30, which is recommended for weaker sources by the NuSTAR Observatory Guide.3 This results in an encircled energy fraction of approximately 50%. SN1987A is relatively weak above 8keV, which is the energy range that is most important for the analysis. Background regions are selected from the same CCD chip as the source. The vicinity of SN1987A is free of strong NuSTAR sources, but bright X-ray sources outside the eld of view (FoV) introduce stray light into the FoV (Madsen et al. 2017b). In general, we aim to select background regions that are squares with sides of 4 5, while excluding a region around SN1987A and stray light. The excluded region around SN1987A is a circle with a radius of We limit the energy range used for the continuum analysis to 324keV. Both the flux and effective area quickly decrease toward higher energies, resulting in a signal-to-background ratio (S/B) lower than 0.3. The low S/B above 24keV results in a very high sensitivity to background systematics. Finally, the spectra are grouped to at least 25 counts per bin. XMM-Newton operates six instruments in parallel: the pn CCD (Strder et al. 2001), MOS1 and MOS2 (Turner et al. 2001), two grating spectrometers (den Herder et al. 2001), and the optical monitor (Mason et al. 2001). Here, we focus on the pn CCD and the reflection grating spectrometers (RGSs). The pn camera covers 0.310keV with a spectral resolution of 2050, which is comparable to the NuSTAR energy resolution. The RGSs cover 0.352.5keV and provide number of lines in this energy range. The angular resolution is dispersion direction of the RGSs, which does not resolve the ER. The RGS apertures extend across the entire 30 FoV along the dispersion direction, but 3 https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/nustar/NuSTAR_observatory_guide  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 1. NuSTAR images showing the source extraction regions (green) and background regions (red) for FPMA (left) and FPMB (right). We only show the observation from 2014 April 22 because other observations are similar. The intensity scales are approximately linear and have been slightly offset to better show the background. The pixel size is    2. 46, and the FoV is approximately 13 . North is up and east is left. Notes. The net source counts in the different instruments are given by CRGS1, CRGS2, and Cpn. All counts are for the standard energy ranges we use for the analysis (see text). The RGS counts are for rst order only. The differences between RGS1 and RGS2 are primarily driven by the different nonoperational CCDs. The total counts in the second-order spectra are 45% of the rst-order counts for RGS1 and 26% for RGS2. a Exposure times after (before) excluding high-background intervals. b Indicates which XMM-Newton data sets are matched with which NuSTAR observation groups; see Table 1. c Observations used for determining the xed parameters (Section 3.2). quickly as a function of off-axis angle. We veried that no other sources are confused with SN1987A. Contamination along the dispersion direction of the RGSs can be identied by comparing the dispersion angle to the energy estimate from the We primarily focus on the most observations for the joint NuSTAR-XMM analysis but include 13 publicly available XMM-Newton observations in total for a longer temporal baseline (Table 2). Due to modest levels of pileup (detailed below), we only use CCD data from the pn CCD, and not the MOS CCDs (Turner et al. 2001). Pileup is For the data reduction, we use XMM SAS 18.0.0 (Gabriel et al. 2004) with XMM CCF updated on 2020 August 3. Most steps of the data reduction follow default standards. We reprocess the data with the latest calibrations and lter the data for high-background intervals (Table 2). For the pn data, we extract source spectra from a circular region centered on SN1987A with a radius of 30, shown in Figure 2. This is a typical source extraction radius and results in  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 2. XMM-Newton/pn image showing the source region (green), background region (white), and RGS FoV (cyan). The cyan lines are parallel with the dispersion direction. We only show the observation from 2014 November 29 because other observations are similar. The intensity scale is logarithmic and white corresponds to 24,000 counts per pixel. The pixel size 4 , and the FoV of the image is approximately an encircled energy of 80%90% depending on energy (lower for higher energies). A larger source radius would only increase the signal marginally while lowering the S/B. For reference, a source radius of 90 results in an encircled energy of 90% 95%, while increasing the background from 1% to almost 10%. Backgrounds are extracted from circular regions from the same CCD chip (#4) with radii of approximately 60 (Figure 2). The very high S/B implies that background has a negligible impact on the analysis. The RGS spectra are constructed using the default source and back ground regions. A heliocentric correction to the photon energies is also applied to the RGS data by default. We pay special attention to pileup in the CCD spectra. Pileup occurs when multiple photons hit the same or adjacent pixels within the same readout frame. The results are that some photons are rejected as invalid events, and an articial hardening of the spectrum as the energies of multiple photons are combined. Pileup affects approximately 5% of the events when the photon flux peaks around the year 2014. This is estimated using the task epatplot, which compares the observed event patterns with expected pattern distributions. Even though the magnitude of the effect signicantly affect the ts. The bins with the most photons have statistical uncertainties as low as 1%. We use the task rmfgen to produce response matrix les (RMFs) that account for pileup, which is enabled by the option correctforpi leup=yes. The ancillary response les (ARFs) are then generated using the standard task arfgen. The CCD spectra are grouped to a minimum of 25 counts per bin using specgroup. Additionally, we impose a minimum bin size corresponding to one-third of the energy resolution FWHM using the parameter oversample=3. The RGS spectra are also binned to a minimum of 25 counts per bin, but using the general task grppha. The large number of photons allows for this binning without signicantly downsampling the energy resolutions of the RGSs. We limit the energy range of the pn data to 0.810keV. The lower bound of 0.8keV is higher than the lower calibration limit of 0.3keV. We ignore data below 0.8keV because of inconsistencies between the pn and RGS spectra of up to 5% Figure 3. XMM-Newton/RGS1 images showing a one-dimensional dispersed image in the upper panel and a PI-dispersion angle plot (banana plot) in the lower panel. The cyan regions in the upper panel are the source regions. The curved regions in the lower panel are source regions (rst and second order) while the four rectangular regions show excluded areas (containing calibration sources). The spatial background region covers the entire exposed surface of the focal plane, except for a buffer zone around the source. We only show the observation from 2014 November 29 because other observations are similar. close to strong lines, which are likely due to calibration uncertainties. The pn spectral bins have individual statistical uncertainties as low as 1% at low energies, which implies that slight calibration issues could signicantly reduce the goodness of t. The calibration accuracy is known to decrease toward Figures D1 and D2), possibly due to the lowest-energy internal calibration line of pn being at 1.5keV (Strder et al. 2001). We choose the 0.8keV limit as a trade-off between using as much data as possible and introducing calibration tensions into (Plucinsky et al. 2008, 2017; We use RGS data from both RGS1 and RGS2, and rst and second order. An RGS1 image showing the dispersed data is provided in Figure 3. The two rst-order spectra cover the energy range from 0.45 to 1.95keV, whereas the second-order spectra range from 0.70 to 1.95keV. The low-energy cutoff of 0.45keV implies that we include the strong N VII Ly line at 0.50keV, below which very few photons are detected. Additionally, the parts of the RGS spectra that coincide with nonoperational CCDs are excluded. We use XSPEC 12.11.0 for spectral tting and use the photoabsorption cross sections of Verner & Yakovlev (1995). We follow the XSPEC convention of the photon index  being E , where N is the photon flux density and E the photon energy. Furthermore, the spectral binning of at least 25 counts per bin allows for the use of c2 statistics. Condence intervals are computed using the error command in XSPEC. All intervals are 90% unless otherwise stated, whereas one-sided limits are 3. The error command threshold. We adopt a critical value of 2.706, which is commonly used in X-ray analyses. However, we stress that this technically only represents the 90% interval for one parameter of interest (Avni 1976; Cash 1976; Lampton et al. 1976). The same argument applies to the 3 limits, for which we use a corresponding threshold of 7.740.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 We use different combinations of data sets for different purposes. For the flux estimates, we prioritize good ts to individual epochs. Therefore, we only use NuSTAR data for NuSTAR fluxes and pn and RGS data for XMM-Newton fluxes. For the spectral analysis, we perform joint ts to NuSTAR and RGS data. We omit the XMM-Newton/pn data in these ts due to calibration uncertainties, which could introduce systematic effects. The signicance of the calibration uncertainties is exacerbated by the large number of photons in the pn data. We discuss the magnitude and characteristics of the instrumental uncertainties further in Appendix C. Furthermore, Appendix D investigates the effects of including pn in the data analysis, as well as explores a number of other alternatives for how to manage the systematic uncertainties. The primary conclusion is that different choices affect the best-t values quantitatively but the qualitative scientic conclusions remain For all ts, we leave a free cross-normalization constant instruments to accommodate calibration uncertainties. The cross-normalizations also allow for some freedom between the NuSTAR and XMM-Newton observa tions, which are separated in time. These constants are generally tted to values within 0.91.1, with most values being close to unity. For some ts, the constants deviate by more than 10% from unity, but this is predominantly due to the time difference between some of the NuSTAR and XMM Newton observations. This shows that the cross-normalizations primarily capture calibration uncertainties and to some extent also the temporal evolution between nonsimultaneous observa tions. Importantly, these constants do not drift to unreasonable values, which would indicate problems with the ts. For spectral modeling, we consistently use the same base model unless otherwise stated. It consists of an absorption component, a Gaussian smoothing kernel, and three shocked plasma components.4 We use the Tuebingen-Boulder inter stellar medium (ISM) absorption model (TBabs; Wilms et al. 2000), gsmooth for smoothing, and vpshock for the plasma emission. We use three duplicates of the shock component to properly capture the range of temperatures that contribute to the spectrum in the 0.4524keV range (Section 4.2 and Appendix D). Below, we describe the components in more detail. The absorption component has only one free parameter, which is the H column density (NH). We stress that this is the total H density, including both atomic H and molecular H2 (Willingale et al. 2013). Solely for the absorption, we adopt the Milky Way ISM abundances of Wilms et al. (2000). Implications of this on the estimated NH are discussed in Section 3.2. The Gaussian smoothing represents the broadening of the spectral lines due to the bulk and turbulent motion of the emitting plasma (Appendix of Dewey et al. 2012). The amount of Doppler blurring in units of energy is proportional to the energy. This implies that the exponent () for the gsmooth energy dependence is always frozen to 1. Thus, the only free parameter of the smoothing component is the magnitude of the blurring measured by s of the Gaussian kernel. Freezing  to 1 implicitly assumes that the emission is produced by gas with the same bulk velocity. Neither assumption is likely strictly is constant(TBabs(gsmooth(textttvpshock Note. Parameters determined from simultaneous ts to three XMM-Newton observations. They are kept xed in all other ts. The recession velocity (Vr) is inferred from the tted redshift. fullled. However, we x it at 1 because we nd negligible improvements when leaving it as a free parameter. The vpshock component (Borkowski et al. 2001) is based on calculations of X-ray spectra using an SN blast-wave model. The main parameters are the shock temperature (T), ionization age (), and emission measure (EM). The EM is implemented as the XSPEC normalization but can be converted to an EM using a distance of 51.2kpc to SN1987A (Panagia et al. 1991; Mitchell et al. 2002). The vpshock model also allows for variable abundances (Section 3.2). The model assumes an adiabatic, one dimensional plasma shock with constant temperature propagating into a uniform CSM. This is clearly oversimplied compared to the complex ER structure. At X-ray energies below 2keV, the shocks producing the emission in SN1987A are also likely radiative and not adiabatic (Pun et al. 2002; Grningsson et al. 2008). A radiative shock produces softer emission compared to an adiabatic shock at the same temperature, as well as different line ratios (Nymark et al. 2006). These effects add additional systematic uncertainties into the absorption and abundance estimates discussed below. The vpshock model also assumes a Maxwellian electron velocity distribution and no cosmic-ray modications. Accelerated cosmic rays could diffuse upstream and form a shock precursor that decelerates the gas ahead of the shock (Borkowski et al. 2001). This would lead to a lower temperature than in the standard, nonmodied shock of the same There are a number of spectral parameters that we keep constant throughout the time range spanned by our observa tions. These parameters are the ISM absorption column density, line broadening, elemental abundances, and redshift (Tables 3 and 4). We initially perform a t to determine these parameters. This is done to avoid having to t all spectra simultaneously with an excessive number of free parameters. All these constant parameters are primarily constrained by the RGS spectra and, to some extent, the pn spectra. Thus, for this particular t, we simultaneously t the model to three XMM-Newton observa tions: 9423, 10,141, and 11,192days (Table 2). The choice of these observations offers a trade-off between exposure time, covering the NuSTAR epochs, and a short enough time range during which spectral variations are moderate. For this t, we tie all parameters that are expected to be constant. Each observation epoch consists of one pn spectrum and four RGS spectra. Among these ve spectra, the plasma ionization age, and EM are tied across the instruments. The setup is the same for each of the three plasma components. These plasma parameters are not tied between observations because they evolve signicantly with time. The  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 )A X is the abundance of element X. Notes. Values with error bars were determined from our ts, whereas the others are taken from the provided references. a Expressed in terms of the astronomical log scale b AISM is the Galactic ISM abundances of Wilms et al. (2000). c ALMC is the LMC abundances of Russell & Dopita (1992). References. (1) Section3.1 of Lundqvist & Fransson (1996), (2) Table 7 of Mattila et al. (2010), (3) Table 1 of Russell & Dopita (1992). cross-normalization constant is frozen to 1.0 for the rst-order RGS1 spectra and left free for the other spectra from the same observation. The global t statistic is c = 5459 degrees of freedom (DoF), with relatively similar goodnesses From the t, we obtain a best-t NH of 1021cm2. This is low compared to estimates of the Galactic NH from H I surveys. For example, Willingale et al. (2013) 1021cm2, and the HI4PI Collaboration et al. 1021cm2 (assuming 20% of H2 for the latter), which are too high to result in statistically acceptable ts to the XMM-Newton (mainly RGS) data. Additionally, optical extinction estimates show that the LMC contribution is greater than the Milky Way contribution (Fitzpatrick & Walborn 1990; France et al. 2011). This implies that the X-ray absorption to SN1987A should be even higher There are two likely contributing factors to our apparent underestimation of NH. First, (Section 3.1) produces harder spectra than radiative shocks (Nymark et al. 2006). This could articially suppress NH in order to produce a softer absorbed spectrum. Second, we use the Galactic abundances of Wilms et al. (2000) for the absorption component to reduce complexity. In reality, the gas along the line of sight could be of lower metallicity, especially the LMC absorption component. This would also have the effect of lowering the tted NH to compensate for an assumed metallicity that is too high. However, we note that our X-ray estimate of NH is comparable to those obtained by other X-ray analyses. For example, Zhekov et al. (2009) report ences are small in light of the different modeling techniques and instruments used. In summary, we conclude that our best-t NH of 1021cm2 may be underestimated due to systematic uncertainties, but we use it in all subsequent ts because it provides the best-t quality and is comparable to previous X-ray The best-t Doppler blur, measured as the  of the Gaussian smoothing kernel, is 1.10.1eV at 1keV. For reference, Dewey et al. (2012) nd a value of 1.0eV in their analysis of The best-t redshift with statistical uncertainties obtained in 4. The total uncertainty is dominated by the RGS absolute calibration of 5 m (   1keV). Therefore, we adopt ( estimate from our X-ray data, which corresponds to a recession km s 1. This is consistent with an km s 1 (Grningsson et al. 2008). integrated over velocities along the line of sight and the entire ER, which has spatial differences in the relative brightness in X-ray and optical. Therefore, it is likely that the X-ray and optical redshifts are truly slightly different. For our purpose, we prioritize a good t to the data and choose to use the value we All tted abundances are provided in Table 4. It also includes abundances of He, C, Ar, Ca, and Ni, which are taken from the literature. These abundances cannot be tted for because they are very weakly constrained by the X-ray data. Overall, the tted abundances are largely within the ranges of values reported by previous studies (Lundqvist & Fransson 1996; Mattila et al. 2010; Sturm et al. 2010; Dewey et al. 2012; Bray et al. 2020). For example, our estimated Fe abundance of LMC abundance can be compared to other X-ray estimates (all expressed relative to the LMC abundance): 0.03 (Bray et al. 2020). However, we caution that all X-ray estimates of the abundances likely suffer from similar signicant systematic uncertainties due to the modeling and absorption uncertainties described above. We leave the abundances of all trace elements to their default values, namely 1.0 relative to our adopted ISM abundances. All ts are insensitive to these trace elements. We test this by setting the abundances of all trace elements to 0.0 using the command NEI_TRACE_ABUND. The c2 value fluctuates by a few, and all tted parameters are practically unchanged. To estimate fluxes, we use the model and parameters described above. The model is tted simultaneously to all spectra within the groups of NuSTAR observations and within each XMM-Newton observation. The free parameters are the temperatures, ionization ages, and EMs for each of the shock components, and a free cross-normalization between the instruments. The NuSTAR data are unable to robustly constrain the coolest plasma component. Therefore, we freeze its parameters to the values from the ts to the XMM-Newton data that are closest in time. This component is almost completely below the lower energy limit of NuSTAR and does not affect the fluxes signicantly. The parameters of each plasma component that are tted for are tied across instruments because the spectra are (quasi-)simultaneous. The average reduced with an average of 347 DoF for the NuSTAR epochs. The corresponding numbers for the XMM Newton observations are c = 1.2 We measure fluxes using the XSPEC component cflux, which has a parameter that corresponds to the flux. After tting the model, the cross-calibration constant is replaced by cflux,  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Fa b denotes the flux from a to bkeV. Asymmetric error bars are statistical and the symmetric uncertainties are systematic (Appendix C). and the model is retted. This results in a flux estimate from each spectrum, which also captures the calibration differences between the instruments. We report the weighted average as the the individual flux measurements provide a handle on the level of systematics (Appendix C). All reported fluxes are observed (not correcting for ISM absorption) due to the uncertain amount of absorption and to allow for comparisons with previous studies. 3.4. Continuous Temperature Model Setup In addition to the standard model, we use a more complex model for the joint NuSTAR and RGS spectral analysis. It is the same as the base model except components are replaced by a distribution of shocks over a continuous temperature interval (Zhekov et al. 2006, 2009), analogous to the XSPEC model c6pvmkl (Lemen et al. 1989; Singh et al. 1996). The distribution of shock EMs is given by where d1 is a normalization, ai are the tting coefcients, and Pi is the Chebyshev polynomial of the rst kind of order i. The temperature T such the temperature interval 0.12510keV is mapped logarithmically to the domain 1 to 1. The seemingly arbitrary parameterization of f reduces the number of free parameters and makes the tting better conditioned. Numeri the continuous temperature is implemented as 28 vpshock components with T logarithmically spaced between 0.125 and 10keV. To further reduce the number of free parameters, we parameterize the ionization age of each shock where TkeV is the temperature in keV, and both the normal ization 2 and power-law (PL) index p are tted for. To summarize, this means that we t a shock with a continuous distribution of T using 10 free parameters: 2 normalizations, 7 polynomial coefcients, and the ionization PL index. The primary advantage of this continuous model ability to capture the complex underlying physics. It has only one more free parameter than the three-shock standard model. The trade-off is increased freedom in temperature at the cost of a more constrained ionization age. Importantly, the continuous model allows for the possibility to separate different compo nents by analyzing the EM distribution. Statistically, typical improvements compared to the standard three-shock model for an average number of DoF of 1800. However, the number of shock components in ordinary models is arbitrary and harder to interpret physically. A priori, it is not clear how each discrete model component translates to physical We report observed fluxes in a number of different energy bands. For NuSTAR, we study the 38, 1024, and 324keV ranges. The 38keV is the hard band in XMM-Newton and Chandra contexts. XMM-Newton fluxes are provided in the 0.52, 38, and 0.58keV bands, in line with previous studies (e.g., Frank et al. 2016). Additionally, we also compute the 0.450.7keV flux, which is dominated by N VII and O VIII Ly. All NuSTAR fluxes are provided in Table 5, whereas the XMM-Newton fluxes are provided in Appendix E. The light curves are shown in Figure 4. In addition to NuSTAR and XMM-Newton, we show the HST R-band (WFPC2/F675W, ACS/F625W, WFC3/F625W; Larsson et al. 2019), 4.5 m Spitzer (Arendt et al. 2020), and 9GHz radio (Cendes et al. 2018) light curves. The two most recent HST data points are previously unpublished, but are computed using the same methods as the other data points and include only the ER emission. The observations were obtained on 2019 July 22 (11,837 days) and 2020 August 6 (12,218 days). It is apparent that the 38keV light curves and the 9GHz 1024keV component increases at a lower relative rate. We note that the 0.52keV flux clearly starts decreasing after around 10,000 days and that the rise of the 38keV flux slows slightly after 11,000 days. This is also reported by Sun et al. (2021) using XMM-Newton data, as well as in a preliminary study of recent Chandra observations (Ravi 2019). These spectral changes are captured by the hardness ratios shown in Figure 5. This illustrates how the 38keV flux becomes increasingly dominant, with the spectra hardening in the XMM-Newton energy range and softening in the NuSTAR range. Finally, we note that the 0.450.7keV evolution is more strongly correlated with the decaying optical flux than the The offset of 10%15% between the NuSTAR and XMM Newton 38keV light curves reveal a systematic difference  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 4. NuSTAR (triangles), XMM-Newton (squares), HST R-band (circles; Larsson et al. 2019), Spitzer 4.5 m (pentagons; Arendt et al. 2020), and 9GHz radio light curves (diamonds; Cendes et al. 2018). Solid symbols represent X-ray data and hollow symbols show other wavelengths. The two y-axes are not equivalent. The right axis applies to the Spitzer and radio data, whereas the left applies to the other data. We note that the 0.52keV, 1024keV, and radio data have been rescaled for clarity as shown in the legend. The dashed lines are polynomial ts to guide the eye. The ts to NuSTAR data are of rst order, while the others are fourth- or fth order polynomials. The solid X-ray error bars are statistical (often smaller than the markers) and the semitransparent error bars approximately represent the systematic (Appendix C). However, for our conclusions, we focus on the evolution as observed by the same instrument, which should be There are indications of variability of approximately 5% between the NuSTAR epochs on timescales of a few weeks (among groups 13 and 57). We caution that these variations might be due to observational uncertainties, origin, or the data reduction process. We t the spectral model with three shock components to all NuSTAR and RGS data sets. Figure 6 shows the best-t model, its three components, and data from the rst NuSTAR epoch (9331 days). The standard model provides an adequate t, and no additional component is statistically necessary (Section 4.5). the 0.4524keV spectrum cannot be adequately modeled by a two-shock component model. This worsens the average goodness of t to the combined NuSTAR much more extensive investigation of the effects of different setups for the spectral analysis in Appendix D. Evolutions of the temperatures of the shock components are components are 0.3, 0.9, and 4keV. The only variation in component at the last NuSTAR epoch (12,140 days). temperature is a slight decrease of For completeness, we provide all best-t parameters, fluxes of shock components, and t statistics in Appendix F. We caution the ionization ages for the three components may be unreliable. This is most evident component, which has a pegged ionization age at all epochs (Table F1). In particular, there appears to be too much freedom in the ts when the ionization ages of the three components are completely free. It is also probable that the tted ionization ages are sensitive to underlying model uncertainties (Section 3.1). The tted parameterization (Equation (2)) of the ionization age used in the continuous shock model  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 5. Hardness ratios, dened as the ratio in a hard over a soft band. For NuSTAR, the hard band is 1024keV and soft 38keV. The soft XMM-Newton range is 0.52keV, whereas the hard is 38keV. These error bars only include the statistical uncertainty because ratios are computed using homogeneous instrumental setups Figure 6. Upper panel: unfolded observed spectra (absorbed but corrected for the instrument responses) from NuSTAR (blue), RGS (orange), and the model (black) in flux space. The NuSTAR data are plotted up to 65keV (just below the Ti lines), but the ts are performed using only data up to 24keV. For visual clarity, we show the sum of the six individual NuSTAR exposures from the rst epoch at 9331days and only the rst-order RGS1 data from 9423 days. Both the NuSTAR and RGS data are also rebinned (represented by the horizontal error bars). The vertical error bars are s1 intervals. The thin dashed lines are the low- (light gray), mid- (gray), and high-temperature (dark gray) shock components that constitute the model. The dotted green line is the nonthermal synchrotron prediction from Berezhko et al. (2015). It is not part of the tted model but is overplotted for reference. The synchrotron component is shown for 9280 days, close to the predicted time of the synchrotron maximum. Although the green synchrotron prediction appears to match two bins around 20keV, an additional component is not statistically motivated (Section 4.5) and the synchrotron prediction is only marginally consistent with the data above 24keV (Section 5.4). Lower panel: normalized residuals between data and model. This difference is computed in count space, implying that the model is forward-folded and then compared to the data. The nonthermal synchrotron component (dotted green line) is not part of the model used for computing the residuals. Due to the importance of the FeK lines, we show the integrated FeK complex in Figure 8. The FeK blend is clearly detected and implies that at least a signicant fraction of the emission at high energies is thermal (see further Section 5.3). The observed line centroid in the NuSTAR data is 6.59keV  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 7. Evolution of the best-t temperatures of the standard three-shock model. The subscripts denote the different shock components: low (1), mid (2), and high (3) temperature. The error bars for the low- and mid-temperature components are small compared to the markers (Tables F1 and F2). and 6.66keV in the XMM-Newton data. We note that Sun et al. (2021) performed a more detailed, time-resolved analysis of the Fe line. They nd that the line centroid increases from around 6.60keV at 8500days to 6.67keV at 12,000 days. A line energy of 6.66keV approximately corresponds to Fe XXIII, which is consistent with a thermal origin of temperature >1 keV (Makishima 1986; Kallman et al. 2004). Its identication is only indicative, and the spectrum clearly has contributions from a range of ionization levels. For reference, reported an emission-line centroid of 6.600.01keV and a width of 100eV. From this, they infer the presence of ionization stages from Fe XVII to Fe XXIV, which is in agreement with our result. Our model spectrum is completely dominated by the 4keV shock component at these energies (Figure 6) and it captures the line prole well. Previous, more careful XMM-Newton analyses of the Fe line have reported that there is a signicant contribution of lower ionization levels around 6.5keV, which is not captured by a thermal shock model (Sturm et al. 2010; Maggi et al. 2012). Maggi et al. (2012) suggested that this could originate from fluorescence from near-neutral Fe, including Fe in the unshocked ejecta. We do not investigate this in detail, but Figure 8 shows that any low-ionization contribution is clearly much weaker than the dominant component from the thermal shock model. the results of the continuous temperature shock model (Section 3.4). The EM distributions are shown in Figure 9. The distributions at all epochs are qualitatively similar, with three peaks at shock temperatures around 0.3, 0.9, and 4keV. The isolated peak around 4keV appears to be robustly separated from the lower-temperature components. The reduced c2 for all ts are in the range 1.051.15, with an average number of DoF of 1685. We caution that the apparent bimodality separating the 0.3 and 0.9keV peaks is only marginally signicant. We draw this conclusion because some ts using different initial conditions nd solutions with a single, broad hump ranging from 0.3 to 1keV. Figure 8. Spectral ts around the FeK complex in count space. The panels are structured similarly to Figure 6. For visual clarity, the data shown are the sum of all NuSTAR data (blue crosses) and the sum of the eight XMM-Newton/pn observations after 8500 days. The summed data are not suited for detailed spectral tting. Instead, we overplot 9920 days, which is close to the average best-t. The solid (NuSTAR) and dashed (XMM-Newton) black lines are the same underlying model but produce different fluxes because of the different instrumental responses. We stress that the large amount of data (500 photons per bin in NuSTAR) makes even small flux and energy differences appear highly signicant. The bin size is 0.04keV for both NuSTAR and XMM-Newton. For reference, the absolute energy calibration around the FeK complex is 0.04keV for NuSTAR (Madsen et al. 2015) and 0.01keV for XMM-Newton/pn. Figure 9. Results of the spectral analysis. Left axis: solid lines are the tted EM distributions (Equation (1)) for the continuous shock temperature model. Right axis: the dashed olive line is the parameterized ionization age (Equation (2)) from the continuous temperature ts. It is shown for the average 2 and p for visual clarity, but the  parameterizations for the different NuSTAR epochs are similar. The vertical dotted lines are the temperatures for the rst (blue; 2012 September) and last (gray; 2020 May) NuSTAR epochs that are obtained by tting the standard model with three shock components. We note that the mid temperature lines close to 1keV are almost overlapping. The points are the tted  for the respective plasma components, and the triangles are lower limits in cases where  is unconstrained. All parameter values from the ts using three shock components are provided in Table F1. These solutions are only marginally statistically worse. Regardless of the detailed structure of the distribution below 2keV, it is still there is a contribution from a broad range of temperatures in the range 0.30.9keV. We reiterate that the shock model relies on a number of assumptions, which introduce The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 additional uncertainties (Section 3.1). It is not computationally feasible to perform a formal error analysis for the EM distribution. Consequently, we note that some of variability between epochs could be insignicant. For analyzing the temporal evolution, the light curves (Section 4.1) and three shock model ts (Section 4.2) are more robust. The parameterized ionization age (Equation (2)) decreasing function of temperature at all epochs (Figure 9). The best-t parameters are d = 0.7. The ionization age is formally dened as the product of the remnant age and the density. For a remnant the parameters above yield a density 102 cm3 at 4keV. The values quoted above are averages across the eight NuSTAR epochs, and the intervals in brackets show the minimum and maximum values. the free ionization ages for the standard three-shock model are poorly constrained by the ts. The t of the parameterized ionization age for the continuous model discussed here is likely more robust, but we caution that systematics certainly are present at some level, in particular for shock temperatures as low as 0.3keV, because these shocks are likely not adiabatic (Section 3.1). Figure 9 also shows the best-t temperatures for ts using the standard three-shock-component model. Only temperatures for the rst and last epochs are shown, but similar temperatures are obtained for all data sets (Figure 7). This indicates that the simpler three-component model captures the same three peaks in the EM distribution reasonably well. The slight shift of the coolest component to 0.5keV, in contrast to 0.3keV for the continuous model, could possibly be explained by a bias due to the absorption. The absorption drastically reduces the number of photons below 0.7keV, which implies that it could be statistically favorable to t the coolest component to slightly higher temperatures when the model is restricted to 4.5. Constraints on Nonthermal Emission We nd no indications of a nonthermal contribution to the X-ray spectrum. The thermal models describe the data well and neither replacing the hottest plasma component with a cutoff PL nor adding an additional PL component results in a better model. Below, we motivate this conclusion in more detail. First, we use the standard three-shock model, but replace the hottest shock component with a cutoff PL. This phenomen ological cutoff PL can be interpreted as a hot 1020keV free free component or synchrotron emission, or to potentially represent a PWN. The photon index of the cutoff PL is frozen to =2 to prevent degeneracies with the shock components. This value for  is similar to that of the Crab Nebula (Bhler & Blandford 2014). We verify that choosing =1.5 or 2.5 does not signicantly affect the conclusions. Freezing the photon index effectively forces the cutoff PL to dominate at higher energies. The cutoff energies and normal izations are left free and tted to all NuSTAR epochs. This t focuses on higher energies and, therefore, we omit the RGS data and instead freeze the coolest shock component. All nonthermal components are harder than the average shape of the thermal that any nonthermal contribution is increasingly subdominant toward lower energies (e.g., Figures 6 and 10). Thus, the RGS data will not affect the hard nonthermal Importantly, the Fe abundance needs to be free in these ts but still constant across different epochs. This is necessary because the Fe abundance was tted using the three-shock model (Section 3.2), where the hottest component captured the FeK line complex. With the hottest component replaced, the Fe abundance will naturally need to increase. This is because the cutoff PL dominates at those energies, and the line strength is proportional to the abundance. We show a comparison of the three-shock model, continuous temperature model, and two-shock plus cutoff PL model in Figure 10. From the ts of the cutoff PL model, we obtain an average tted cutoff energy of 8keV and an Fe abundance of 1.0 relative to the LMC Fe abundance. For reference, the corresponding Fe abundances are 2.0 for G = 2.5. Statistically, the goodness with the =2 for 2778 DoF, compared to c = 2597 for 2771 DoF for the three-shock model. However, we consider the Fe abundance to be unreasonably high (further discussed in Section 5.3) and a strong indication that contribution around 6.5keV is underestimated using this model. Furthermore, the ts to different epochs result in cutoff energies ranging from 2.4 to 13keV and normalizations spanning a factor of 3. This is compensated by changes in the best-t temperature of the warmer of the two shocks from 1.5 to 5.4keV. These factors all indicate that it is possible to include a nonthermal component, but it is not statistically nor physically motivated and adds unnecessary complexity to the model. We note that we consider adding a cutoff PL as introducing additional complexity because it is composed of a qualitatively new component even though, number of DoF is reduced from 2778 to 2771.5 Therefore, we reject the model with the cutoff PL. Another possibility is to simply add a nonthermal component to the three-shock model. In this case, a cutoff energy cannot be constrained, so we add a PL with =2. We note that the Fe abundance remains frozen to our adopted standard value of 0.62 of LMC because the hottest shock component still dominates around 6.5keV. Fitting yields an improvement of for 1 additional DoF (2770 DoF in total) compared to the standard three-shock model. This means that the PL results in a negligible improvement, and it To put a limit on the nonthermal emission, we start from the t above with the additional PL component with =2. By tting simultaneously to all observations, we obtain one average upper limit instead of an upper limit at each epoch. The upper limit is computed by nding the PL normalization that results in an relative to the best t (using the XSPEC task error). We take the flux of the PL component with this new normalization as a 3 upper limit. The resulting limits are 10 14 ergs1cm2 between 38keV and coincidentally 10 14 ergs1cm2 between 1024keV. These limits are clearly model dependent, as discussed in Section 5.3. A very conservative, model independent limit is to consider the total fluxes as upper limits (Table 5), with the 1024keV range likely being the most 5 Each shock component has three free parameters, whereas the cutoff PL has two as  is frozen, and the Fe abundance is free when tting the cutoff PL  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure 10. Three different models tted to the rst (upper panel) and last (lower panel) NuSTAR epochs. The models are the standard three thermal shocks model (blue), the continuous temperature model (orange), and two thermal shocks with an additional cutoff PL (green). We also show the cutoff PL component separately (thin gray lines). The blue line in the upper panel (largely covered by the other lines) shows the same model as in Figure 6, but we note that the y-axes are different to 4.6. 3565keV Limit on the Compact Object We obtain a 3 upper limit on any flux from SN1987A in the 10 14ergs1cm2. This was com puted using a =2 PL component without an underlying thermal component. This limit does not require model assump tions because SN1987A is not detected in this energy range, which is above the continuum emission from the ER and below the radioactive 44Ti line emission. This limit is primarily relevant for the compact object but, naturally, also applies to any other decay chain produces high-energy X-ray lines, which have been detected by NuSTAR (see Boggs et al. 2015 for details). The radioactive K lines in the XMM-Newton energy range are studied separately in Appendix B. We repeat the analysis of Boggs et al. (2015), but with the inclusion of our Following the baseline case of Boggs et al. (2015), we tie the fluxes, energies, and widths of the two lines. This can be done because the relative fluxes (96.4 93.0) and energies (78.32 keV 67.87 keV) are given by the relative yields and respectively. The widths are simply proportional to the energy. This implies that both lines are tted simultaneously, using the free parameters of only one lines in Figure 11. The best-t energy of the 67.87keV line is 0.09 keV in Boggs et al. (2015). We note that separate ts to the individual modules yield 0.13 keV for FPMB. In terms of velocities, our redshifts (after correcting for recession velocity and the look-back effect; The difference between the modules indicates that systematic uncertainties could be comparable to the statistical uncertainties.6 In this context, systematic uncertainties include all factors related to the data reduction and analysis, in addition to the 6 We reiterate that these condence intervals are at a 90% level, as in Boggs  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 5.1.1. Emission from the ER Clumps 1. Optical and ultraviolet (UV) observations resolve the hotspots in the ER and show slow, radiative shocks with km s 1 into clumps with preshock Grningsson et al. 2008; Larsson et al. 2019). 2. There is a clear eastwest asymmetry in the X-ray emission (Frank et al. 2016; Cendes et al. 2018). The X-ray emission below 2keV is stronger to the west and follows the optical ER emission. This implies that the ER clumps dominate the <2 keV X-ray flux. 3. The inferred ER radii in optical and X-rays also indicate that the <2 keV X-rays originate from the same region as the optical ER (Frank et al. 2016; Larsson et al. 2019). Furthermore, the <2 keV radius appears to separate into two components after 6000days when divided at 0.8keV, with the <0.8 keV component expanding the 4. Simulations of shock interactions with the ER clumps reveal a complex picture (Borkowski et al. 1997; Pun et al. 2002; Orlando et al. 2015, 2019). The interactions clearly disrupt the clumps, disperse the clump material, and produce both radiative and adiabatic shocks of varying temperatures. The temperatures are expected to range from 0.2 to 1keV depending on the shock velocities, densities, and incidence angle. In this paper, we have presented new light curves of the soft X-ray emission (Figure 4). These are in line with previous conclusions and further corroborate the hypothesis that the soft X-ray emission is primarily produced in the ER clumps. Figure 4 shows that X-rays below 2keV have a similar evolution as optical and there are indications that the 0.450.7keV light curve is more strongly correlated with the optical emission than the 0.52keV emission after 10,000 days. This may be explained as a result of the cooling time (tcool) depending on the shock velocity (Vs) and (Grningsson et al. 2008). Densities much higher 104cm3 are therefore required to produce optical emission km s 1. Consequently, a decreasing fraction of the X-rays above 2keV is expected to follow the 5.1.2. Emission from the Low-density Regions In addition to studies indicating that the X-ray emission below 2keV originates from the ER clumps, the X-rays above 2keV likely originate from a region of wider latitudinal extent and lower density. This is primarily motivated by the following 1. Already in 1997, HST observations revealed Ly and H emission extending to30 above and below the ER (Michael et al. 1998). Later, radio and X-ray observations showed similar latitudinal extents (Ng et al. 2009, 2013; Cendes et al. 2018). This is also consistent with VLT observations, which show H emission extending lines. The panels are structured as in Figure 8. The large difference between the two lines are due to the highly varying instrumental response within this energy range, which is close to the upper energy limit of NuSTAR. For visual clarity, the data shown are the rebinned sum of all NuSTAR observations. instrumental calibration uncertainty (see also Appendix C). For the reported energy calibration uncertainty at 67.87keV is 0.06keV (Madsen et al. 2015), corresponding Analogous to the redshift, we provide Ti based on both the joint t and ts to the individual modules. The combined analysis yields a 67.87keV line flux of 6 photonss1cm2, which corresponds to an fluxes to masses, we use a distance of 51.2kpc and correct the observed fluxes by 3% to account for Compton scattering by the ejecta (Alp et al. 2018a and Section 5.5 below). M reported by Boggs et al. (2015) and Our mass estimate is comparable to the value obtained from modeling of an optical spectrum by Jerkstrand et al. (2011). Furthermore, a slight difference is apparent between FPMA and FPMB also for the inferred masses. The FPMA M obtained from FPMB. This further highlights the subtle systematic uncertainties, which are important to consider. 5.1. Physical Interpretation of the Thermal Emission Thermal shock models adequately describe the observed X-ray spectra. We nd no indications of a nonthermal component in the spectrum. Instead, we favor an interpretation where the low- and mid-temperature components originate from the ER clumps, while the high-temperature component regions. The ER clumps could give rise to a range of temperatures as a result of varying incident shock angles, hydrodynamic disruption of the clumps, and a mix of radiative and adiabatic shocks of varying temperatures. The low-density regions refer to both the diffuse gas between the ER clumps and the high-latitude H II region. This interpretation is motivated by a number of independent simulations and observations across the electro magnetic spectrum. We present these points separately for the ER clumps in Section 5.1.1 and low-density regions in Section 5.1.2, before tying things together in Section 5.1.3.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 (Fransson et al. 2013). Later VLT observations continue to show similar velocities (Larsson et al. 2019). 2. In contrast to the <2 keV X-rays, the asymmetries of the >2 keV X-rays follow the radio torus and are brighter to the east. The new optical emission beyond the ER is also stronger to the east, indicating stronger interaction at high latitudes in this direction (Larsson et al. 2019). 3. The inferred ER radii in radio and X-rays indicate that the >2 keV X-ray and radio emission is produced by shocks Cendes et al. 2018). We note that small discrepancies between the X-ray and radio radii could be due to a combination of limited spatial resolution, projection effects, and overlap between different components (energies) in 4. X-ray emission from the fastest shocks moving in the low-density regions are expected to produce a faint, broad component in the line proles. This could potentially the relative contributions of different shock velocities to the X-ray emission below 2keV. A 20% contribution from a broad component corresponding to a km s 1 has been reported by Dewey et al. (2012), but the limited energy resolution and line blending complicate analyses. The X-ray line proles have also been successfully tted without a broad component (Zhekov et al. 2009). We do not investigate the line proles in detail but obtain good ts using However, optical and UV lines show directly that a km s 1 component is present (Michael et al. 1998; Fransson et al. 2013). For these very fast shocks, the slow equipartition between the electrons and ions likely leads to a considerably lower electron than ion temperature, which we discuss below. We present the 38 and 1024keV light curves to 2020 in Figure 4. The 38keV X-ray light curve follows the radio light curve relatively well. The 1024keV light curve has a flatter evolution, but this is likely the effect of a slight decrease in temperature (Figure 7), rather than an indication of a different physical origin (Section 5.3). This shows that the X-ray light curves agree with the picture painted by the previous, The points above, along with further pieces of information, form a combined picture. Assuming equipartition between electrons and protons behind the shocks, the temperature is related to the shock velocities by for our adopted abundances. Using observed velocities in the optical and X-rays, one can therefore relate these to the observed temperatures we nd. The optical ER expands with a velocity of (Larsson et al. 2019) since 7700 days, and line proles of the optical hotspots show velocities up to 7001000 depending on the geometry, with an FWHM of 300 (Fransson et al. 2015). This corresponds to a shock temperature 1keV. Therefore, these shocks may be at least partially responsible for the two lower temperature compo nents. These shocks will be radiative for densities up to km s 1 for the 0.52keV band and 3071299 From the Chandra X-ray observations later than 6000 days, Frank et al. (2016) nd an expansion velocity of 1851 the 210keV band. Assuming equipartition, the former corre , while the latter corresponds to 13.2keV. To reconcile the high velocity in the 0.52keV band with the temperature, one needs to assume that the emission in the 0.52keV band has contributions from both slower radiative shocks, also emitting in the optical, and faster, adiabatic shocks emitting mainly in X-rays. Deviations from equipartition could also be contributing. This is primarily relevant for the hottest component and is described in more detail below. We note that Frank et al. (2016) nd an expansion velocity of  km s 1 in the 0.30.8keV range after 6000 days. This shows the inferred velocities within X-ray energy ranges are combinations from shocks of varying expansion velocities. Finally, to connect the higher velocities seen by Frank et al. (2016) in the 210keV band to the 4keV component that we nd, one has to assume only partial equipartition of the ion and electron temperatures behind these faster shocks. Slow equilibra tion behind fast shocks has been inferred from supernova remnants, where a ratio of electron to ion temperature of 2 has been proposed for Balmer-dominated shocks into neutral media (Ghavamian et al. 2013). In the context of from observations of the reverse shock with a velocity of km s 1. X-ray emission from the reverse shock, with an electron temperature of 2049keV (assuming T Te above), is presumably too faint to be seen, because of the low In addition to the temperatures, the densities inferred from the tted parameterized ionization age (Section 4.4) are comparable to previous estimates. Based on optical data, the densities of the unshocked ER clumps are estimated to reach 104 cm3 (Pun et al. 2002; Grningsson et al. 2008). Furthermore, modeling based on radio and optical data nds densities of 103cm3 in the diffuse ER (Mattila et al. 2010) and a density of 102cm3 in the surrounding H II region (Chevalier & Dwarkadas 1995; Lundqvist 1999). Our estimates are uncertain but capture the trend of a decreasing ionization age as a function of increasing energy. This is an indication that cooler, slower shocks originate from regions of higher density. There are a number of observables that are not completely explained by our model. We are unable to provide a natural reason for why the temperature distribution produced by the clumps would be bimodal. It could simply be that the apparent bimodality is a smoother broad distribution in reality. from regions spanning a wide range of densities. Thus, it is somewhat surprising that the temperature distribution shows such a narrow peak around 4keV. A possibility is that the relatively homogeneous H II region dominates this component. However, given the complexity of the system, we believe that these are minor issues. There are also signicant modeling uncertainties underlying the shock model used for the analysis, temperatures below 1keV where radiative losses become important (Section 3.1). In addition, other emission components, such as the reverse shock propagating back into the ejecta, are predicted to contribute at some level at  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Comparison with Previously Fitted Thermal Model Temperatures a The subscripts denote individual shock component temperatures or temperature distribution peaks. Models with only two characteristic temperatures lack the mid the current epochs (Orlando et al. 2015, 2019). This is likely an underlying component, which is absorbed into our three The spectra from different epochs are relatively similar except for a decrease in temperature of the hottest component in the last epoch (Figure 7). The geometry is too complex for detailed predictions of the temporal evolution. We simply note that a slight decrease in temperature is physically reasonable based on a general deceleration of the ejecta and the blast wave. Therefore, a completely thermal interpretation of the spectrum is consistent with the observed temporal evolution. To summarize, the combination of all available information implies that the X-ray emission likely is of purely thermal origin. This emission would be produced by shocks with typical temperatures of 0.30.9keV in the ER clumps and 4keV in the surrounding diffuse ER and H II region. However, we conclude by cautioning not to overinterpret the data. This is simply our favored simplication of a clearly more complex 5.2. Previous Thermal Modeling Our spectral analysis indicates the presence of three compo nents. Only a few previous analyses have used three shock components (Zhekov et al. 2010; Dewey et al. 2012; Maggi et al. 2012). In contrast, most earlier studies found bimodal temperature distributions (Zhekov et al. 2006, 2009; Dewey et al. 2008) or used two shock components (Haberl et al. 2006; Heng et al. 2008; Sturm et al. 2010; Park et al. 2011; Helder et al. 2013; Frank et al. We provide a comparison of our tted temperatures with a selection of literature values in Table 6. Our ts nd higher maximum temperatures than most other analyses, especially at comparable epochs. Notably, even the previous analyses with continuous temperature models only found two peaks. The differences are primarily due to the wider energy range provided by NuSTAR, which we show in Appendix D (Table D1). Some previous ts found comparable maximum tempera tures at epochs earlier than 7000 days, before the ER interaction peak. This is likely because the continuum from the surrounding low-density region was dominant even below 5keV, which is the range where other analyses are primarily sensitive. In addition to the values in Table 6, Maggi et al. (2012) mention that the hottest temperature is >3.5 keV in XMM-Newton observations from 7000 to 9000 days, but they did not present a complete spectral analysis. There appears to be a trend that XMM-Newton data result in higher temperatures likely due to the higher high-energy sensitivity of XMM-Newton. This strengthens the argument that NuSTAR data are required to more robustly t shock components with temperatures above 3keV (see Appendix D Even though we favor a thermal interpretation of the X-ray contribution. In Section 4.5, we showed that a model where the hottest shock component is replaced by a cutoff PL provides a t of comparable quality to the purely thermal model. However, an important feature for the interpretation of the X-ray spectrum is the FeK line complex around 6.46.9keV (Figure 8). The presence of a clear FeK line in the observed X-ray spectrum implies that at least part of the hard X-ray emission is of  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 thermal origin. The strength of the line predicted by the thermal model is proportional to the tted Fe abundance. Therefore, in principle, it is possible to accommodate an additional nonthermal component by increasing the Fe abundances. This results in a higher modeled thermal line-to-continuum ratio, which would then need an additional nonthermal continuum component to properly match the observed line-to-continuum ratio. Conse quently, the Fe abundance would be articially suppressed if we attempt to t a purely thermal model to a spectrum that has a signicant fraction of nonthermal emission. We nd that our best-t Fe abundance of 0.62 relative to the LMC (Table 4) provides adequate ts to the FeK line (Figure 8; see also Sturm et al. 2010; Maggi et al. 2012). We be reasonable and, hence, not an indication of an underlying nonthermal component. This is further strengthened by the 0.31 relative to the LMC based on optical spectroscopy (Mattila et al. 2010). If there is a signicant nonthermal contribution, we expect a substantially The correlation between the 38keV and radio light curves (Figure 4) could be interpreted as a suggestion that (part of) the hard X-rays are nonthermal. However, the 1024keV light curve rises much more slowly than the 38keV light curve. This is opposite to what would naively be expected if the hard X-rays are of nonthermal origin. The 1024keV flux would be expected to increase faster because thermal X-rays would contribute more to the 38keV than the 1024keV range in relative terms. In this scenario, it is implicitly assumed that the thermal flux would not increase as fast as the radio flux, based on comparisons between radio and soft X-rays. Because the 1024keV flux increases more slowly than 38keV, a nonthermal model would need to have a contrived spectral evolution, which we disfavor against a simple, slight decrease in maximum temperature in a completely thermal model. Following the above arguments, we conclude that evidence for a nonthermal component is weak. Instead, we use the data to compute upper limits (Sections 4.5 and 4.6) as constraints on a nonthermal component. These limits constrain cosmic-ray acceleration and the properties of the compact The shocks from the CSM interactions around SN1987A are expected to accelerate relativistic particles (Berezhko et al. 2011, 2015; Dwarkadas 2013). The relativistic electrons from this acceleration process are thought to produce the observed radio emission and it is possible that the same nonthermal synchrotron to X-ray energies. From a theoretical perspective, Berezhko et al. (2015) present a prediction for the nonthermal X-ray contribution associated with cosmic-ray accel eration. Using their model for cosmic-ray acceleration (Berezhko & Ksenofontov 2000, 2006), they nd a peak 3565keV flux of 5 10 14ergs1cm2 at 9280days (Figure 6), which is marginally consistent with our upper limit of   However, the predicted fluxes at 38 (   10 13ergs1cm2) exceed the corresp onding model-dependent limits by a factor of 2 (Section 4.5). Recently, it has been reported that a brightening GeV source has been detected by Fermi/LAT, possibly associated with SN1987A (Malyshev et al. 2019; Petruk et al. 2019). The GeV emission could be of either hadronic or leptonic origin. In the hadronic scenario, accelerated protons interact with protons in the ISM and produce neutral pions, which decay into gamma rays. On the other hand, a leptonic origin implies relativistic bremsstrahlung and inverse Compton scattering by accelerated electrons. The scenario that most directly affects the observed X-ray emission is if the GeV emission is leptonic and a signicant part of the X-ray emission is nonthermal. In this case, a steep rise in the GeV emission would be correlated with a more rapid increase in the (hard) X-ray light curve due to an increasing nonthermal component. The observed GeV light curve increases by at least a factor of 2 between 2012 and 2018 (Malyshev et al. 2019; Petruk et al. 2019). This time range roughly coincides with the rst and last NuSTAR observation. Both the X-ray and radio light curves continue to smoothly increase at steady rates by factors of 1.5 over this time interval (Figure 4). Notably, the high energy X-ray component above 10keV is the flattest and barely increases during this time. Therefore, we conclude that there is no obvious correlation between any part of the X-ray or radio light curve with the GeV increase. This indicates that the GeV emission is of hadronic origin or unrelated to SN1987A. 5.5. Limits on the Compact Object The upper limit on a nonthermal component in the NuSTAR data places new constraints on the compact object at hard X-ray energies and complements the multiwavelength limits pre sented in Alp et al. (2018b). Currently, indication of a neutron star is the bright spot observed in a 679GHz ALMA image (Cigan et al. 2019). This could potentially be the result of local dust heating by thermal emission from a neutron star, as suggested in Alp et al. (2018b). A PWN can also match the observation, but this model is practically unconstrained and can t almost any data. Therefore, we nd no reason to favor the PWN model over passive thermal neutron star heating. However, we stress that the conclusions from the ALMA image are uncertain due to a low S/B, possible structure in the underlying dust emission, and poorly constrained spectrum and luminosity of the possible source. More data are needed to clarify the nature of the ALMA Recently, Greco et al. (2021) interpreted the 20122014 NuSTAR data as indications of a PWN and rejected a purely thermal interpretation of the data. This is in stark contrast to our results. As we show in Section 4.5, we are unable to motivate a model with a nonthermal component. We also search for pulsed emission between 10 and 20keV (Appendix A), which could be present contributing. No pulsations are detected, and the pulsed fraction is constrained to less than 15% of the total source Adding a PWN component to a thermal model will, of course, the additional complexity cannot be statistically nor physically motivated. Furthermore, even if the adopted model contains a nonthermal component, we believe that more likely explanations are synchrotron emission from the high-energy tail of a freefree component. As outlined in Section 5.1.3, the reverse shock is expected to produce a faint component with Both shock synchrotron and freefree components are expected  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 and are likely to be present at Finally, any proposed model for the compact object form a coherent physical picture with observations at other wavelengths and the total energy budget of the system. Due to the excellent observational coverage, the allowed bolometric luminosity of the neutron star is con strained to be lower than 10100 L (Alp et al. 2018b). The quoted luminosity interval accounts for the uncertainty in the amount of newly formed dust in the ejecta along the line of Our 3565keV flux limit provides the deepest constraints on any X-ray emission from a compact object in SN1987A. X-ray emission from the compact object is affected by absorption because it resides close to the center of the ejecta (Alp et al. 2018a). The high metallicity of the SN ejecta results in photoabsorption dominating up to 30keV. This implies that the cross section above 30keV is dominated by Compton scattering and that the opacity at these energies is many orders of magnitudes lower than in the 0.310keV band. We estimate the 3565keV absorption using a three-dimensional neutrino driven SN explosion model (Alp et al. 2018a), specically the B15 model from Wongwathanarat et al. (2015). This is the same absorption model as was used for SN1987A by Alp et al. (2018b). We nd that approximately 5% of the 3565keV flux is expected to be absorbed at 10,000 days, which we henceforth correct for. For reference, the optical depth to the center of the ejecta at current epochs is 100 at 1keV, 3 at 5keV, and 0.03 at 50keV (Alp et al. 2018a). The absorption-corrected 3565keV limit ergs1cm2 (Section 4.6) and corresponds to approximately 1034ergs1 (7 L ) for a distance of 51.2kpc. This is equivalent to a fraction of 0.05 of the Crab Pulsar (excluding the Nebula; Bhler & Blandford 2014) and is the most constraining direct limit on a Crab Pulsar-like spectrum. This is than previous hard X-ray limits but does not qualitatively affect any conclusions in Alp et al. (2018b). We have studied new NuSTAR observations of SN1987A obtained in 2020 and performed a combined analysis with archival NuSTAR data from 2012 to 2014 and XMM-Newton data from 2000 to 2019. This combination covers a wide X-ray interval ranging from 0.45 to 78keV. In conjunction with the long temporal baseline, it provides a unique X-ray view of the The X-ray light curves in different energy bands have evolved signicantly over the past few epochs. The 1024keV flux remained practically constant between 9300 and 12,000days (20122020). In contrast, the 38keV flux was rising but has tentatively started to flatten after 11,000days (2017). Previously published radio light curves only extend to 10,942days (2017; Cendes et al. 2018), but followed the rising phase of the 38keV emission up to that point. The 0.52keV emission has clearly decreased since 10,000days (2015). In particular, we nd that the correlation between optical and X-rays is increasingly strong for decreasing X-ray energies. We favor a purely thermal description of the X-ray spectra. Acceptable ts require three shocked plasma components at temperatures of approximately 0.3, 0.9, and 4keV. We obtain results using a model with a continuous temperature distribution. Previous studies have mostly used two components with temperatures of approximately 0.5 and 2.5keV. The difference is most likely due to the extended energy range offered by NuSTAR, which has not been used for ts of purely thermal spectra in previous studies. Our favored interpretation associates the 0.3 and 0.9keV components with the dense ER clumps, whereas the 4keV emission originates from the diffuse ER gas and the high latitude H II region. There is no obvious explanation for why the ER clumps would produce emission at temperatures. The bimodality between the 0.3 and 0.9keV components is, however, uncertain and could be the manifesta tion of a smoother broad distribution. We nd no evidence for a nonthermal contribution to the X-ray data, neither from the temporal nor spectral analysis. The 1024keV flux does not follow the synchrotron radio light curve, which would be the most natural expectation if the X-ray emission is increasingly dominated by synchrotron emission from shock-accelerated electrons at higher energies. The spectral ts do not improve when a PL is added, and the clear FeK line complex is also well captured by a purely thermal nonthermal component results in a statistically acceptable t but requires an unreasonably high Fe abundance. Furthermore, interpretation forms a consistent picture with temporal, spectral, and spatial multiwavelength information from the literature. However, we note that this does not rmly exclude a, possibly weak, nonthermal contribution. A brightening of SN1987A at GeV energies has recently been reported (Malyshev et al. 2019; Petruk et al. 2019). We nd no clear correlation between the GeV and X-ray emission. This the GeV emission is dominated by hadronic processes or unrelated to SN1987A. However, in the leptonic scenario, predictions for the level of X-ray emission and the high energy synchrotron cooling cutoff are both uncertain. This leaves the leptonic channel possible but requires it with the observational upper limits (   10 14ergs1cm2 from 35 to We also analyze the radioactive NuSTAR data to repeat the analysis rst performed by Boggs et al. (2015). We nd a redshift of M . However, there appear to be potentially signicant systematic uncertainties, indicated by differences in the results from different analysis methods. These uncertainties are of approximately the same magnitude as the statistical uncertainties in both the redshift and mass, which should be considered in subsequent analyses and XMM-Newton observations constrain the radioactive aK lines are rmly detected, but the initial Fe55 mass is inferred to from NuSTAR is consistent with a nondetection at 4.1keV in masses in the range 120  -10 4 et al. 2014; Sieverding et al. 2020). Our results favor a Fe55 mass toward the lower end of this range. However, this relies on the 10HMM model. The masses from simulations are also based on a diversity of SN progenitors, and the progenitors are exploded using different methods. Because we favor a purely thermal model for the full X-ray spectrum, we argue that there are no indications of a pulsar.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Even if a faint nonthermal component is present, it is more likely to be shock-accelerated synchrotron emission or the high-energy tail of a freefree component. We also constrain the pulsed fraction of the 1020keV flux to be less than 15% The NuSTAR data constrain the 3565keV luminosity of the compact object in SN1987A to be lower than 2 10 14ergs1cm2). We put this into context by comparing the limit with previous multiwavelength observations. These show that the bolometric luminosity of the compact object must be lower than 10100 L (range due to uncertain properties of the dust). Currently, an ALMA image at 679GHz is the only tentative hint of a neutron star SN1987A, which needs to be veried with higher quality data. Our analysis shows that NuSTAR observations are required for a complete X-ray view of SN1987A. NuSTAR is the only instrument sensitive enough to detect the X-ray continuum above 10keV, which affects the interpretation of the entire X-ray spectrum. The optical depth to the compact object is currently 1 at 10keV, which implies that practically no X-rays of lower energy escape unless clumping is stronger than simulations indicate. This means that NuSTAR could be the most sensitive telescope to search for X-ray emission from a potential neutron star. If the GeV emission keeps increasing, it is also possible that a nonthermal component will emerge in the NuSTAR range. Future NuSTAR observations of SN1987A are therefore critical to complement the regular monitoring at We thank the anonymous referee for the comments. This work was supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the Swedish Research Council, and the Swedish National Space Board. This research has made use of data obtained through the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Online Service, provided by the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. This research has made use of the NuSTAR Data Analysis Software (NuSTARDAS) jointly developed by the ASI Science Data Center (ASDC, Italy) and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech, USA). Based on observations obtained with XMM-Newton, an ESA science mission with instruments and contributions directly funded by ESA Member States and NASA. The timing analysis was enabled by resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at the PDC Center for High Performance Computing, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreement No. 2018-05973 (Dnr: PDC-2018-56 and PDC-2018-101). This research has made use of NASAs Astrophysics Data System. Facilities: NuSTAR, XMM (EPIC, RGS). Software: ADS (Kurtz et al. 2000), astropy (3.0.4; Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018), CALDB (20200726), CCF (2020 August 3), FTOOLS (Blackburn 1995), HEAsoft (6.27.2; NASA High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Hunter 2007), numpy (1.13.1; van der Walt et al. 2011), NuSTARDAS (1.9.2; van der Walt et al. 2011), SAOImage DS9 (8.1; Joye & Mandel 2003), SAS (18.0.0; Gabriel et al. 2004), scipy (1.1.0; Virtanen et al. 2020), XSPEC (12.11.0; We search for pulsed X-ray emission from SN1987A as this would be the smoking gun of a pulsar. For this timing analysis, we use the observations from 2012 to 2014 (all NuSTAR epochs except for the last). Restricting the temporal baseline to two years improves the sensitivity. A number of contribute to this. First, a shorter temporal baseline requires a lower resolution in rotational period because period errors propagate proportionally to the baseline. Second, a lower resolution in the pulsar spin-down rate is required because this also propagates into the phase solution. Furthermore, limiting the time range to two years reduces the risk of including more included in the modeled phase solution, such as nonlinear spin evolution or discrete glitches. Finally, including the 2020 data only increases the total number Before performing a detailed search for pulsed emission, we visually inspect the light curves. The light curve from the 2013 June 29 observation is shown in Figure A1 as an example (the other light curves are similar). There are no indications of variability within individual observations. A priori, a detection is also unlikely given our favored model for SN1987A and limited data quality. However, a rigorous search for pulsed emission is motivated by the importance of a potential detection and the fact that the expected spin period cannot be The reduction of this data was performed separately and used the latest software at an earlier time of analysis, specically NuSTARDAS 1.8.0 and CALDB version 20180126. We Dynamical Time (TDB) at the solar system barycenter using the task barycorr (for an overview of measures of time, see Eastman et al. 2010), with JPL Planetary Ephemeris DE-405. We combine the data from the FPMA and FPMB modules and restrict the energy range to 1020keV. Below 10keV, Chandra images clearly show that optical depth through the ejecta is also very high below 10keV (Section 5.5). The upper 20keV limit is imposed to optimize We extract source photons from a circular region with a radius of 75 pixels, which optimizes the signal-to-noise ratio. No background sample is necessary for the timing analysis. The source region contains a total of 22,381 events, and the number of source events is estimated to be 10,000, assuming a spatially uniform background. Overall, our timing method is similar to that of the Fermi pulsar search Einstein@Home (Clark et al. 2017). Here, we provide an overview of the method and motivate the choice of The source extraction radius of 75 is relatively large compared to the 18 FWHM of the telescope, which implies that a large number of background events are included. This is not an issue because we assign a weight to each event based on the likelihood that it is produced by SN1987A (Bickel et al. 2008; Kerr 2011). The likelihood is computed by considering  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure A1. Combined FPMA and FPMB 1020keV source light curve of the 2013 June 29 NuSTAR observation. The black line shows the average count rate, which has a total c2 value of 88 for 93 DoF (the error bars are 1). The bin size is 5.8ks (horizontal error bars), matching the orbital period of NuSTAR. The count rate has been corrected for Earth occultation periods and time-ltering criteria (Section 2.1), which result in varying livetimes within each bin. the position of the event, the background level, and the known point-spread function of the telescope. To test the signicance of pulsed emission, we use the H-test introduced by de Jager et al. (1989). The test is named after Hart (1985) and belongs to the class of tests for uniformity on the circle (Rayleigh 2020; Beran 1969). The H-test is designed to be powerful for typical, general pulsar pulse proles, which is useful when the pulse prole is unknown. The null cumulative distribution function for the H-statistic is accurately known from simulations (de Jager & Bsching 2010). The H statistic from different observations can be summed incoher ently, and its approximate null distribution is also known (de To reduce computational complexity, we divide the total exposure of 2.8Ms into 32 time intervals with an average exposure of 90ks. A search is performed on each interval separately, and the test statistics are then combined incoher ently. The incoherent summing over long timescales is possible because the timing accuracy of NuSTAR is stable to within 2 ms (Madsen et al. 2015; see Bachetti et al. 2021 for a recent signicant improvement to <100 s). The neutron star spin is characterized by the period (P) and spin-down rate ( P). We search all periods from 30ms to 1ks. For reference, the temporal resolution of NuSTAR is 3ms (Madsen et al. 2015), and the deadtime per event is 2.5ms (Bachetti et al. 2015; Bachetti & Huppenkothen 2018). For each P, we search P from 0 to a maximum limit on P. This limit is either set by the spin-down luminosity (L) or the spin-down age (tsd), depending on which is more constraining for a given P. The spin-down is related to the luminosity by where M is neutron star mass and R the neutron star radius. We adopt parameter values of L=10,000 L , M=1.4 R=12km (zel & Freire 2016). This spin-down luminosity is much higher than the bolometric limit on the order of 100 L the spin-down luminosity could potentially be much higher than the bolometric luminosity (Abdo et al. 2013; Caraveo 2014). The spin-down age is given by and we choose the limit t > 10 s aforementioned values, the limit on P from Equation (5) is s1. The spin-down must fulll both criteria, implying a sufciently low L to be consistent with multi wavelength observations and high enough tsd to be reasonably consistent with the age of SN1987A. For completeness, we P for each P to allow for potential spin-up. We detect no pulsed emission from SN1987A and verify that the observed HT distribution is consistent with the null distribution. Instead, we put a constraint on the pulsed fraction of the emission in the 1020keV range. We compute the limit by simulating a pulsed signal. The signal is modeled by a single Gaussian with a duty cycle of 20% (FWHM). Assuming the 1020keV emission to be from a PWN, the 3 upper limit on the source pulsed fraction is 15% (background subtracted). Importantly, however, the 1020keV range certainly includes photons from ER interactions. This implies that the upper limit on the pulsed fraction of the compact object emission is less constraining than 15%. For example, if the thermal-to-PWN flux the pulsed fraction is completely unconstrained because a 100% pulsed fraction would go undetected. We search early XMM-Newton pn and MOS data for the 4.1keV lines. Only observations from 2000 to 2003 (Table B1) are used because the thermal emission from the ER becomes overwhelming at reduction is similar to the reduction for the primary analysis (Section 2.2). The differences are that we use both pn and MOS data, perform no pileup correction due to the lower fluxes, and choose smaller source radii of 1025 to improve S/B. Furthermore, we bin to a minimum of 1 count per bin and use the Cstatistic (Cash 1979) because of the lower number of  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 XMM-Newton Observations Used for Limits on Radioactive K Lines M (Leising 2006; Popov et al. 2014; Note. All cameras were not operating simultaneously in science mode during some observations in the early XMM-Newton cycles. photons. A background subtraction is not performed for these ts. Technically, XSPEC employs the Wstatistic for these ts, but it is activated using the statistic cstat command.7 Our methods follow Leising (2006), who performs an analogous analysis using Chandra data. Focusing rst on the chain, we limit the energy range to 48keV and t a model consisting of a PL and a Gaussian line. The PL normalization, PL photon index, and line flux are left free. The line energy is frozen to 5.9keV, and the line width (represented by ) is frozen to 0.06keV (3000 photonss1cm2. This is similar to the approximate limit of 10 7 photonss1cm2 found by Leising (2006). line is absorbed by the ejecta to a varying degree sensitively depending on the spatial Mn amount of absorption is modeled by an average effective optical depth. At the relevant epochs, only the outermost Mn near side is observable (Alp et al. 2018a, 2019). Therefore, dedicated detailed computations are necessary to estimate the amount of absorption. Leising (2006) estimated the amount of absorption of the 5.9keV line by the ejecta using the 10HMM SN model (Pinto & Woosley 1988). This model is one-dimensional and has additional mixing introduced by hand. It was designed to successfully match many observables particular the X-ray and gamma-ray properties during the rst few years (Alp et al. 2019). At the relevant epochs, the effective optical depth is 1.2 at 5.9keV for the modeled Fe55 Combining this with the flux limit results in a 3 upper limit on However, we note that there is a hint of a line at 5.9keV in the data. Quantitatively, the estimated flux is photonss1cm2 with a 1 condence level. This indicates that there might be a weak detection of the line or possibly slight contamination from the Mn source (Strder et al. 2001). We inspect the residuals but are unable to draw a rm conclusion. If astrophysical, the flux would point toward an initial Fe55 mass of We stress that the interval is a purely statistical 1 interval. Systematic uncertainties are certainly also signicant, particu larly due to uncertainties in the amount of absorption. For reference, nucleosynthesis simulations predict Fe55 masses in 7 https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSappendixStatistics.html 4.1keV line is analogous to that of the , we use the 35.5keV range, shift the line to 4.1keV, and repeat the same procedure. The 3 upper 10 7 photonss1cm2. We note that He-like Ca could produce K-shell lines near 4.1keV, but we see no signs of any line around 4.1keV in the residuals. The thermal X-ray emission rapidly rises toward lower energies, which reduces the sensitivity. Because the initial Ti M (Section 4.7), we compute the unattenuated 10 7 photonss1cm2. Thus, the 4.1keV flux limit does not constrain any parameters because it implies an effective optical depth of >1, which clearly is consistent with the value of 3 obtained from the 10HMM model. The calibration of X-ray instruments is known to be slightly inaccurate with errors of approximately 5%10% (Plucinsky et al. 2008, 2017; Ishida et al. 2011; Madsen et al. 2017a). In general, the calibration errors are energy dependent, implying that spectral shapes are affected in addition to the overall normalization. We introduce free constants between different instruments when tting simultaneously, which capture overall normalization errors. This approach does not address the energy dependence but is still conventionally used in X-ray The calibrations are known to be variable and depend on epoch, observing conditions, and underlying spectrum. There fore, we investigate the spectral difference between NuSTAR and XMM-Newton/pn using our data. We do this by tting a simplied version of the thermal shock model. This model is the same as the standard model but with only one shock component. This is sufcient because we only perform the comparison in a reduced energy range from 3 to 8keV. To quantify the calibration differences, the temperature of this single component is untied between NuSTAR and pn (with  We t this model to all epochs and provide the resulting temperatures and t statistics in Table C1. The average NuSTAR temperature (k TB AB) is 2.79keV compared with the average pn temperature (k TB pn) of 2.39keV. This difference is clearly systematic as all TAB are signicantly higher than Tpn. When the temperatures are tied, the average cross-normal ization between NuSTAR (CAB) and pn (Cpn) is CAB. The corresponding factor is 0.71 when the temperatures are untied. Consequently, the absolute magnitude difference between NuSTAR and pn is approximately 0.88. The remaining difference when the temperatures are untied is primarily due to the connection between the temperature and the EM. This shows that both the normalization and spectral shapes are different between NuSTAR and pn. Table C1 also shows the improvement obtained by untying the NuSTAR and pn temperatures compared with tying the temperatures. The average difference differences are signicant. This value is only computed from  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Comparison of Fitted Temperatures between NuSTAR and XMM-Newton/pn Notes. Fitting a single shock component to the 38keV range. The temperature TAB is inferred from the NuSTAR data whereas Tpn is from pn data. The ts to the XMM-Newton data show a rather variable goodness of t at different epochs, likely primarily driven by random fluctuations and to a lesser extent by the spectral evolution. The data quality and reduction process are very similar for the different XMM-Newton epochs. a Epoch of the NuSTAR observation. b Difference in time from the XMM-Newton to the NuSTAR observation. Three different XMM-Newton observations are used in these ts (see Table 2). d Used for connecting the NuSTAR and XMM-Newton temperatures in Appendix D. e The tted temperatures rise in the last epoch, in contrast to the results of the main spectral analysis (Figure 7). This is because the soft part of the spectrum fades whereas the hard part brightens (Figure 4). The combined effect causes the 38keV range to harden. 2 ) obtained by untying TAB from Tpn. the goodness within the tted 38keV energy range and would be higher if a broader energy range was used. We note that the third NuSTAR and pn epochs are separated by only one day. Any temporal evolution within this time interval is certainly negligible. The ts from this epoch show differences introduced by assuming simultaneity within the epochs likely are small compared to the systematic calibration results to other epochs, which implies that Due to the calibration uncertainties, we omit the pn data from the detailed spectral analysis to avoid biases. We motivate this further and explore the effects of including pn data and a uncertainties in detail in Appendix D below. Finally, we also note that the pn data are corrected for modest levels of pileup (Section 2.2), which could affect the accuracy. In addition to the systematic differences between NuSTAR and pn, the analysis is also affected by calibration uncertainties between pn and RGS at low energies. The differences between these instruments have previously been studied by dedicated calibration programs (Plucinsky et al. 2008, 2017). Small differences are clearly visible in the observations of SN1987A (see Figures in Appendix D), but modeled due to the more complex spectrum at low energies. A simplied method of avoiding part of the problem is to raise the lower limit of the pn energy range slightly. We choose 0.8keV as a trade-off between using as much data as possible and introducing calibration tensions into the ts. In addition to the instrumental calibration errors, there are systematics introduced by the data reduction and methods. For example, Frank et al. (2016) also analyzed the XMM-Newton observations up to 10,141 days. We nd better agreement within a few percent at 0.52keV and at earlier epochs (around 8000 days), but up to 10% higher 38keV fluxes at later times. There is a large number of factors that could contribute to these differences: source and background regions, data calibration version, choice of underlying model, free parameters, ISM and model abundances, amount of absorption, cross sections, and For these reasons, we add a systematic uncertainty to our X-ray fluxes. This is added in quadrature to the systematic error in Figure 4, but we report both separately in tables. We adopt a ducial systematic uncertainty of 8% (of the total flux), which we believe is a reasonable estimate. This particular value is the typical difference we nd in our comparisons between independent analyses. It also agrees with cross-calibration programs between different instruments (e.g., Madsen et al. 2017a; Plucinsky et al. 2017). We do not rely on this value for any quantitative analysis. The purpose is solely to serve as a reminder of the systematics, which are often left implicit. these systematics only apply to comparisons between parameters from different instruments, data reductions, or methods. The systematic errors are likely signicantly lower for analyses of homogeneously estimated parameter values. Importantly, Alternative Setups for the Spectral Analysis In this section, we explore different possibilities for handling the cross-calibration uncertainties in the spectral analysis. We try different spectral models, treatments of instrument differ ences, and data sets. A summary is provided in Table D1, and the ts are described below. Importantly, even though the best t values are slightly different, our main conclusions remain unchanged regardless of how the data are analyzed. D.1. Models Used for Comparisons The models we present here are the standard model with three shocks and a simplied version with only two shock components. We t this model to RGS, pn, and NuSTAR data simultaneously as well as separately to data from only two of the instruments. This leads to four possible setups for each of the models. All parameters apart from constant cross-normal ization factors are tied between the instruments in these ts. The tted energy ranges are the same as presented in Section 3.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Fit Results for Different Data Sets and Models 3. The summed t statistics across all epochs are given by cS Notes. The data sets used are indicated by the check marks and crosses. The t statistics for the third epoch when the NuSTAR and XMM-Newton observations are separated by one day are given by c DoF . The temperatures are the averages across epochs for the different shock components in order of increasing temperature, identied by the subscripts. The last model has different NuSTAR and XMM-Newton temperatures for the hottest component. The NuSTAR temperature is T3, whereas the XMM-Newton temperature is TX. The statistical errors (not shown) for the temperatures vary by approximately a factor of 2 for the different setups. More data generally reduce the uncertainties and the different data sets naturally primarily affect the components within the energy ranges of the instruments. a The Roman numeral superscripts identify the models among the subgures in Figure D1. Model III is the standard model that is used for the spectral analysis in the In addition to the ts with two and three shock components, we investigate a variation of the three-shock model. For this model, the temperatures of the hottest component are coupled 3, where T3 is the NuSTAR temperature and TX is the XMM-Newton temperature. The factor of 0.88 is obtained from the t to the overlapping 38keV region of the third epoch at 9424days (Table C1). This version of the model with different temperatures for the hottest components is only tted to RGS, pn, and NuSTAR data simultaneously. There are a number of other possible variations for connecting the NuSTAR and pn data. In addition to the ts presented below, we have explored constraining the cross normalizations, completely decoupling the temperatures, and additionally untying the EMs of the hottest components. The trend is naturally that gradually increasing the amount of freedom improves the t quality, but the results are similar for The t statistics and temperatures of the above setups are provided in Table D1. We present the t statistics to all data combined, the average temperatures, and the goodness of ts to the third epoch (9424 days; NuSTAR and XMM-Newton are separated by one day). We also show ts of four of the models in Figure D1 where the models are identied by Roman First, we compare ModelsI andII. These are the models with two and three shock components, respectively, that are tted to data from NuSTAR, RGS, and pn. It is clear that two components (Model I) are insufcient to model the combined including a third component (Model II) results in a substantial improvement in the goodness of t. the improvement for the third epoch alone is for an additional 3DoF, and cD = 3630 additional 24DoF across all epochs combined. The reason for the inferior t using two components is primarily driven by the <2 keV range, as can be seen in Figure D1. This is also clear from the temperatures of the two cooler components of the three-shock model. Both cool components have temperatures two subgures of Figure D1 also show that below 1keV and primarily influence the RGS energy range. addition of a third component does not signicantly change the broadband model continuum shape. This implies that conclu sions regarding the continuum are relatively independent of the third shock component. However, a third component is clearly improved ts can be achieved by allowing for more freedom by freeing the constant parameters (Section 3.2) or more conservative data-ltering criteria (which reduces the number of photons; e.g., Sun et al. 2021), but exploring all possibilities are not within the current scope. Figure D1 subgure II can also be compared with subgure III. Both use the same standard three-shock model. The difference between these models is that ModelII is tted to all data, whereas ModelIII is tted to NuSTAR and RGS data. We note that ModelIII is the primary standard model used for the main analysis. The pn data in subgure III have been overplotted and only rescaled by a factor of 0.95 to minimize the residuals. It is clear from the residuals that there are systematic offsets between the NuSTAR and pn data (as quantied in Appendix C above). This is especially clear in the overlapping region. Furthermore, the pn data are in excess of the model in the 3keV region, which is a consequence of the differences in spectral slope. The conse quences of these difference can be seen in the residuals of subgure II and the worse t statistic. Given the known differences between NuSTAR and pn, we also show the model variant with the NuSTAR and XMM Newton temperatures rescaled as ModelIV can be compared to ModelsII andIII in Figure D1. The rescaling of temperatures alleviates a signicant part of the tension but still drastically reduces the overall quality of the t when compared to ts without pn data. Comparing ModelsIII andIV, introducing the pn data to the ts introduces 1005 DoF in total across all epochs (Table D1). The change in total c2 is 1946, implying that the t is signicantly worse despite the calibration errors between all complicated than what can be captured by our simplied  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure D1. NuSTAR (blue), RGS (orange), and pn (green) spectra together with the best-t model (black) from the third epoch at 9424 days. The four subgures show different setups (Table D1): two-shock model tted to all data (I). Three-shock model tted to all data (II). Three-shock model tted to NuSTAR and RGS with pn overplotted (III). This is the standard model used throughout the main text. Three-shock model tted to all data with the temperatures of the hottest component 3 between XMM-Newton and NuSTAR (IV; Appendix C). The top panels in the individual subgures show the spectra, the middle panels show the normalized residuals, and the bottom panels show the data-to-model ratio. The two upper panels of each gure are analogous to Figure 6. The pn data are shown from 0.3keV, but only 0.810keV data are used for the analysis throughout the paper. In addition to the decrease in overall t quality for ModelIV, the average cross-normalization constant between the NuSTAR and XMM-Newton data is 0.82. These ts use the three-shock model, but NuSTAR is quite insensitive to the two cooler components. This means that the EM of the hottest component is degenerate with the cross-normalization con stant, which implies that the connection between the NuSTAR and pn data is relatively weak. Consequently, shock components are largely decoupled between NuSTAR and pn, which partly defeats the purpose of including the pn data. In light of this, we conclude that adding the pn data introduces biases, and adds little information because the components are required to be Despite the above arguments, including pn data remains a possible alternative. In principle, it is possible that the pn data are more accurate than NuSTAR data. However, the incon sistencies in the overlapping region between NuSTAR and pn there must be signicant calibration errors. The excess above 10keV in NuSTAR, which is more pronounced when pn data are included, cannot be a result of instrumental calibration because the ratio between the data and model is much higher than 10%. It is possible that the t attempts to capture calibration inconsistencies at the expense of producing  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 an articial excess above 10keV. This could happen if both the inconsistencies and articial excess are of comparable statistical signicance. Importantly, including pn data does not affect the scientic conclusions qualitatively. The pn data lower the temperature of the hottest component from 4 to 33.4keV. Naturally, this leads to an increased excess in the NuSTAR data above 10keV. This does not imply that the origin of such an excess is physically different. Even in this case, we argue that it most likely is the hottest part of the thermal emission. Simply adding a fourth thermal component to the model does not provide stable ts as the temperatures vary irregularly across epochs. We note that the continuous temperature model has sufcient freedom to allow for a broader temperature distribution. This model ts the data well and is discussed in Appendix D.3 below. Instead, to characterize the shapes of the NuSTAR spectra, we t a two-shock model to all NuSTAR epochs with no other data sets. The tted temperatures are 1.80.3 and 5.90.7keV (these intervals are standard deviations among the eight epochs) with a total t statistic of c = 2599 DoF. We also inspect the residuals and nd that the ts are very good. This shows that the NuSTAR spectra can be well tted with a thermal model with temperatures up to 6keV. Temperatures around 6keV are not unreasonably high because a faint, hot component with temperatures of up to 2049keV is expected from the reverse shock (Section 5.1.3). Moreover, in Section 4.5, we show that the NuSTAR data alone do not favor the inclusion of an additional PL component, implying that thermal models are fully sufcient to model the  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure D2. Upper-left panel: tted EM distributions (Equation (1)) for the continuous shock temperature model. Solid lines are for the ts to only RGS and NuSTAR data (same as in Figure 9). Dashed lines are the corresponding ts to all data, including pn. Only a cross-normalization is allowed to vary between the instruments. Only four epochs are shown for visual clarity but the remaining epochs show similar behaviors. Upper-right panel: NuSTAR (blue), RGS (orange), pn (green), and the model (black) spectra from the third epoch at 9424 days. The t is only performed to NuSTAR and RGS data. The pn data are only overplotted and rescaled by 1.06 to minimize the residuals. Lower panel: same as upper right but also tted to the pn data. The upper-right t corresponds to the solid orange line in the upper-left plot, whereas the lower-panel t corresponds to the dashed orange line. As in Figure D1, the pn data are shown from 0.3keV, but only 0.810keV data are used for the analysis throughout the paper. physically distinct components based on the NuSTAR data alone. Therefore, it seems more likely that an excess, which is more signicant when pn data are included, is a result of calibration uncertainties or a high-energy tail of the thermal distribution. Based on the above discussion, we favor excluding the pn data from the spectral analysis, while noting that including the pn data would not affect the conclusions qualitatively. D.3. Implication of Adding pn Data for the Continuous Model is also illuminating to explore ts of the continuous in addition to the discrete temperature models above. We show the results of ts of the continuous to RGS, pn, and NuSTAR data in Figure D2. Only a cross-normalization constant is allowed to vary between the instruments (standard setup). The results are qualitatively similar to ts without the pn data and primarily show a well-separated high-temperature peak and a broader, possibly bimodal, peak below 2keV. The differences are expected due to the large amount of freedom in the ts and the amount of data added by pn. This further strengthens the the pn data do not qualitatively affect  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Figure D2 also shows spectra and residuals of the continuous model for the third epoch at 9424 days. We show ts both with and without the pn data. The temperature distributions for these models both show contributions up to approximately 5keV, above which the distributions quickly decline. It is clear that an excellent t can be achieved using the continuous model when pn data are not included. In particular, we note that the slight excess visible above 10keV is well captured when the model includes a faint temperature tail to 6keV. The t including the pn data is also relatively good. It is evident that the main issues for this t are the tensions between the instruments, as can be seen in the overlapping regions. This can also be seen in the t statistics. When pn data are included, the t statistic for the third epoch increases by 267 for 126 DoF, for a total increase of 1954 for 1005 DoF across all epochs. Despite the tensions, resulting temperature distribution is very similar to when pn This further corroborates the conclusion that a purely thermal model is sufcient. Of course, the investigations above do not prove that other components are excluded. They only show that additional components are not necessary. We provide fluxes in four energy bands for all XMM Newton observations in Table E1. These fluxes, except for the full 0.5-8keV flux, are plotted in Figure 4. The 0.450.7keV range is dominated by the strong N VII Ly (0.5003 keV) and O VIII Ly (0.6537 keV) lines. In the literature, 0.52keV is commonly referred to as the soft band, while 38keV is the Fa b denotes the flux from a to bkeV. Asymmetric error bars are statistical, and the symmetric uncertainties are systematic (Appendix C).  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Table F1 provides all best-t parameters for ts using the temperatures are shown in Figure 7. We note that all t2 and the last-epoch t1 only have lower limits. There also appears to be slight degeneracies between  and EM between different shock components, which can be seen by the difference at 12,140days relative to the other epochs. However, decrease in T3 in the last epoch appears robust. This is supported by the light curves, hardness ratios, and continuous In Table F2, we provide the observed (absorbed) fluxes of the individual components and goodness-of-t measures. These fluxes are the bolometric fluxes of the components. Conse quently, they are much more uncertain than the fluxes in energy bands (Table 5) because the component fluxes are more sensitive to the underlying model. Best-t Parameters of the Three-shock Model to NuSTAR and RGS Data Note. The subscripts on the parameters in the header refer to the three individual shock components in terms of increasing temperature. The goodness-of-t measures of these ts are provided in Table F2. Observed Bolometric Fluxes of the Shock Components in Table F1 Note. The subscripts refer to the three individual shock components in terms of increasing temperature.  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0427-5592 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0065-2933 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8532-3594 Abdo, A. A., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 17 Ahmad, I., Greene, J. P., Moore, E. F., et al. 2006, PhRvC, 74, 065803 Alp, D., Larsson, J., Fransson, C., et al. 2018a, ApJ, 864, 175 Alp, D., Larsson, J., Fransson, C., et al. 2018b, ApJ, 864, 174 Alp, D., Larsson, J., Maeda, K., et al. 2019, ApJ, 882, 22 Arendt, R. G., Dwek, E., Bouchet, P., et al. 2016, AJ, 151, 62 Arendt, R. G., Dwek, E., Bouchet, P., et al. 2020, ApJ, 890, 2 Arnaud, K. A. 1996, in ASP Conf. Ser. 101, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems V, ed. G. H. Jacoby & J. Barnes (San Francisco, CA: Arnett, W. D., Bahcall, J. N., Kirshner, R. P., & Woosley, S. E. 1989, Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipcz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, Bachetti, M., Harrison, F. A., Cook, R., et al. 2015, ApJ, 800, 109 Bachetti, M., & Huppenkothen, D. 2018, ApJL, 853, L21 Bachetti, M., Markwardt, C. B., Grefenstette, B. W., et al. 2021, ApJ, 908, 184 Beran, R. 1969, Ann. Math. Stat., 40, 1196 Berezhko, E. G., & Ksenofontov, L. T. 2000, AstL, 26, 639 Berezhko, E. G., & Ksenofontov, L. T. 2006, ApJL, 650, L59 Berezhko, E. G., Ksenofontov, L. T., & Vlk, H. J. 2011, ApJ, 732, 58 Berezhko, E. G., Ksenofontov, L. T., & Vlk, H. J. 2015, ApJ, 810, 63 Bickel, P., Kleijn, B., & Rice, J. 2008, ApJ, 685, 384 Blackburn, J. K. 1995, in ASP Conf. Ser. 77, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, ed. R. A. Shaw, H. E. Payne, & J. J. E. Hayes (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 367 Blondin, J. M., & Lundqvist, P. 1993, ApJ, 405, 337 Boggs, S. E., Harrison, F. A., Miyasaka, H., et al. 2015, Sci, 348, 670 Borkowski, K. J., Blondin, J. M., & McCray, R. 1997, ApJ, 477, 281 Borkowski, K. J., Lyerly, W. J., & Reynolds, S. P. 2001, ApJ, 548, 820 Bouchet, P., Dwek, E., Danziger, J., et al. 2006, ApJ, 650, 212 Bray, E., Burrows, D. N., Park, S., & Ravi, A. P. 2020, ApJ, 899, 21 Bhler, R., & Blandford, R. 2014, RPPh, 77, 066901 Burrows, C. J., Krist, J., Hester, J. J., et al. 1995, ApJ, 452, 680 Burrows, D. N., Michael, E., Hwang, U., et al. 2000, ApJL, 543, L149 Cameron, J. A., & Singh, B. 1999, NDS, 88, 299 Caraveo, P. A. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 211 Cendes, Y., Gaensler, B. M., Ng, C.-Y., et al. 2018, ApJ, 867, 65 Chevalier, R. A., & Dwarkadas, V. V. 1995, ApJL, 452, L45 Chita, S. M., Langer, N., van Marle, A. J., Garca-Segura, G., & Heger, A. Cigan, P., Matsuura, M., Gomez, H. L., et al. 2019, ApJ, 886, 51 Clark, C. J., Wu, J., Pletsch, H. J., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 106 Crotts, A. P. S., & Heathcote, S. R. 2000, ApJ, 528, 426 de Jager, O. C., & Bsching, I. 2010, A&A, 517, L9 de Jager, O. C., Raubenheimer, B. C., & Swanepoel, J. W. H. 1989, A&A, den Herder, J. W., Brinkman, A. C., Kahn, S. M., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L7 Dewey, D., Dwarkadas, V. V., Haberl, F., Sturm, R., & Canizares, C. R. 2012, Dewey, D., Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., & Canizares, C. R. 2008, ApJL, Diehl, R. 2018, Astrophysics with Radioactive Isotopes, Vol. 453 (2nd ed.; Basel: Springer International Publishing), 674 Dwarkadas, V. V. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 3368 Dwek, E., Arendt, R. G., Bouchet, P., et al. 2010, ApJ, 722, 425 Eastman, J., Siverd, R., & Gaudi, B. S. 2010, PASP, 122, 935 Esposito, P., Rea, N., Lazzati, D., et al. 2018, ApJ, 857, 58 Fitzpatrick, E. L., & Walborn, N. R. 1990, AJ, 99, 1483 France, K., McCray, R., Penton, S. V., et al. 2011, ApJ, 743, 186 Frank, K. A., Zhekov, S. A., Park, S., et al. 2016, ApJ, 829, 40 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Migotto, K., et al. 2015, ApJL, 806, L19 Fransson, C., Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 88 Gabriel, C., Denby, M., Fyfe, D. J., et al. 2004, in ASP Conf. Ser. 314, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) XIII, ed. F. Ochsenbein, M. G. Allen, & D. Egret (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 759 Ghavamian, P., Schwartz, S. J., Mitchell, J., Masters, A., & Laming, J. M. Graves, G. J. M., Challis, P. M., Chevalier, R. A., et al. 2005, ApJ, 629, 944 Grebenev, S. A., Lutovinov, A. A., Tsygankov, S. S., & Winkler, C. 2012, Greco, E., Miceli, M., Orlando, S., et al. 2021, ApJL, 908, L45 Grningsson, P., Fransson, C., Leibundgut, B., et al. 2008, A&A, 492, 481 Haberl, F., Geppert, U., Aschenbach, B., & Hasinger, G. 2006, A&A, 460, 811 Harrison, F. A., Craig, W. W., Christensen, F. E., et al. 2013, ApJ, 770, 103 Hart, J. D. 1985, J. Stat. Comput. Simul., 21, 95 Hasinger, G., Aschenbach, B., & Truemper, J. 1996, A&A, 312, L9 Helder, E. A., Broos, P. S., Dewey, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 764, 11 Heng, K., Haberl, F., Aschenbach, B., & Hasinger, G. 2008, ApJ, 676, 361 HI4PI Collaboration, Ben Bekhti, N., Fler, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A116 Hirata, K., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., Nakahata, M., & Oyama, Y. 1987, PhRvL, Hunter, J. D. 2007, CSE, 9, 90 Ishida, M., Tsujimoto, M., Kohmura, T., et al. 2011, PASJ, 63, S657 Janka, H.-T., Gabler, M., & Wongwathanarat, A. 2017, in IAU Symp. 331, Supernovae and their Aftermaths, ed. A. Marcowith et al. (Cambridge: Jansen, F., Lumb, D., Altieri, B., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L1 Jerkstrand, A., Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2011, A&A, 530, A45 Joye, W. A., & Mandel, E. 2003, in ASP Conf. Ser. 295, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XII, ed. H. E. Payne, R. I. Jedrzejewski, & R. N. Hook (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 489 Junde, H. 2008, NDS, 109, 787 Kallman, T. R., Palmeri, P., Bautista, M. A., Mendoza, C., & Krolik, J. H. Kurtz, M. J., Eichhorn, G., Accomazzi, A., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 41 Laming, J. M. 2001, American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 598, Joint SOHO/ACE workshop Solar and Galactic Composition, ed. R. F. Wimmer-Schweingruber, 411, doi:10.1063/1.1434031 Lampton, M., Margon, B., & Bowyer, S. 1976, ApJ, 208, 177 Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Alp, D., et al. 2019, ApJ, 886, 147 Lawrence, S. S., Sugerman, B. E., Bouchet, P., et al. 2000, ApJL, 537, L123 Leising, M. D. 2001, ApJ, 563, 185 Leising, M. D. 2006, ApJ, 651, 1019 Lemen, J. R., Mewe, R., Schrijver, C. J., & Fludra, A. 1989, ApJ, 341, 474 Lundqvist, P. 1999, ApJ, 511, 389 Lundqvist, P., & Fransson, C. 1996, ApJ, 464, 924 Madsen, K. K., Beardmore, A. P., Forster, K., et al. 2017a, AJ, 153, 2 Madsen, K. K., Christensen, F. E., Craig, W. W., et al. 2017b, JATIS, 3, Madsen, K. K., Harrison, F. A., Markwardt, C. B., et al. 2015, ApJS, 220, 8 Maggi, P., Haberl, F., Sturm, R., & Dewey, D. 2012, A&A, 548, L3 Makishima, K. 1986, in The Physics of Accretion onto Compact Objects, ed. K. O. Mason, M. G. Watson, & N. E. White (Berlin: Springer), 249 Malyshev, D., Phlhofer, G., Santangelo, A., & Vink, J. 2019, arXiv:1903. Manchester, R. N. 2007, in AIP Conf. Ser. 937, Supernova 1987A: 20 Years After: Supernovae and Gamma-Ray Bursters, ed. S. Immler, K. Weiler, & R. McCray (Melville, NY: AIP), 134 Martin, C. L., & Arnett, D. 1995, ApJ, 447, 378 Mason, K. O., Breeveld, A., Much, R., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L36 Mattila, S., Lundqvist, P., Grningsson, P., et al. 2010, ApJ, 717, 1140 McCray, R. 1993, ARA&A, 31, 175 McCray, R., & Fransson, C. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 19 Menon, A., & Heger, A. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 4649 Miceli, M., Orlando, S., Burrows, D. N., et al. 2019, NatAs, 3, 236 Michael, E., McCray, R., Pun, C. S. J., et al. 1998, ApJL, 509, L117 Michael, E., Zhekov, S., McCray, R., et al. 2002, ApJ, 574, 166 Mitchell, R. C., Baron, E., Branch, D., et al. 2002, ApJ, 574, 293 Mochizuki, Y., Takahashi, K., Janka, H.-T., Hillebrandt, W., & Diehl, R. 1999, Morris, T., & Podsiadlowski, P. 2007, Sci, 315, 1103 Motizuki, Y., & Kumagai, S. 2004, NewAR, 48, 69 NASA High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (Heasarc) 2014, HEAsoft: Unied Release of FTOOLS and XANADU, v6.27.2, Astrophysics Source Code Library, ascl:1408.004  The Astrophysical Journal, 916:76 (30pp), 2021 August 1 Ng, C.-Y., Gaensler, B. M., Murray, S. S., et al. 2009, ApJL, 706, L100 Ng, C.-Y., Gaensler, B. M., Staveley-Smith, L., et al. 2008, ApJ, 684, 481 Ng, C.-Y., Zanardo, G., Potter, T. M., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 131 Nymark, T. K., Fransson, C., & Kozma, C. 2006, A&A, 449, 171 Orlando, S., Miceli, M., Petruk, O., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A73 Orlando, S., Miceli, M., Pumo, M. L., & Bocchino, F. 2015, ApJ, 810, 168 zel, F., & Freire, P. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 401 Page, D., Beznogov, M. V., Garibay, I., et al. 2020, ApJ, 898, 125 Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Macchetto, F., Adorf, H.-M., & Kirshner, R. P. Park, S., Burrows, D. N., Garmire, G. P., et al. 2002, ApJ, 567, 314 Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., et al. 2006, ApJ, 646, 1001 Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., et al. 2011, ApJL, 733, L35 Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., Garmire, G. P., & McCray, R. 2004, Park, S., Zhekov, S. A., Burrows, D. N., & McCray, R. 2005, ApJL, 634, L73 Petruk, O., Beshley, V., Marchenko, V., & Patrii, M. 2019, arXiv:1912.06452 Pinto, P. A., & Woosley, S. E. 1988, Natur, 333, 534 Plucinsky, P. P., Beardmore, A. P., Foster, A., et al. 2017, A&A, 597, A35 Plucinsky, P. P., Haberl, F., Dewey, D., et al. 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7011, 70112E Popov, M. V., Filina, A. A., Baranov, A. A., Chardonnet, P., & Chechetkin, V. M. 2014, ApJ, 783, 43 Pun, C. S. J., Michael, E., Zhekov, S. A., et al. 2002, ApJ, 572, 906 Racusin, J. L., Park, S., Zhekov, S., et al. 2009, ApJ, 703, 1752 Ravi, A. P. 2019, in Supernova Remnants: An Odyssey in Space after Stellar Rayleigh, L. 2020, London Edinburgh Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 37, 321 Russell, S. C., & Dopita, M. A. 1992, ApJ, 384, 508 Sanduleak, N. 1970, CoTol, 89 Sieverding, A., Mller, B., & Qian, Y. Z. 2020, ApJ, 904, 163 Singh, K. P., White, N. E., & Drake, S. A. 1996, ApJ, 456, 766 Sonneborn, G., Pun, C. S. J., Kimble, R. A., et al. 1998, ApJL, 492, L139 Staveley-Smith, L., Manchester, R. N., Kesteven, M. J., et al. 1992, Natur, Strder, L., Briel, U., Dennerl, K., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L18 Sturm, R., Haberl, F., Aschenbach, B., & Hasinger, G. 2010, A&A, 515, A5 Sturm, R., Haberl, F., Hasinger, G., Kenzaki, K., & Itoh, M. 2009, PASJ, Sun, L., Vink, J., Chen, Y., et al. 2021, arXiv:2103.03844 Turner, M. J. L., Abbey, A., Arnaud, M., et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L27 Tziamtzis, A., Lundqvist, P., Grningsson, P., & Nasoudi-Shoar, S. 2011, Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H. T., et al. 2021, ApJ, 914, 4 van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, CSE, 13, 22 Verner, D. A., & Yakovlev, D. G. 1995, A&AS, 109, 125 Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, NatMe, 17, 261 Wampler, E. J., Wang, L., Baade, D., et al. 1990, ApJL, 362, L13 West, R. M., Lauberts, A., Schuster, H.-E., & Jorgensen, H. E. 1987, A&A, 177, L1 Willingale, R., Starling, R. L. C., Beardmore, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., & OBrien, P. T. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 394 Wilms, J., Allen, A., & McCray, R. 2000, ApJ, 542, 914 Wongwathanarat, A., Mller, E., & Janka, H.-T. 2015, A&A, 577, A48 Zanardo, G., Staveley-Smith, L., Indebetouw, R., et al. 2014, ApJ, 796, 82 Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., Borkowski, K. J., Burrows, D. N., & Park, S. 2005, Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., Borkowski, K. J., Burrows, D. N., & Park, S. 2006, Zhekov, S. A., McCray, R., Dewey, D., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, 1190 Zhekov, S. A., Park, S., McCray, R., Racusin, J. L., & Burrows, D. N. 2010, A core-collapse supernova (CCSN) is an astronomical explosion that indi cates the death of a massive star. From observations, it is clear that a large fraction of all massive stars undergoes supernova (SN) explosions, but de scribing how SNe explode has remained a challenge for many decades. A key piece of the puzzle is the properties of the progenitor star. The attached papers focus on comparing theoretical predictions with ob servations, primarily observations of SN 1987A. It is the closest observed SN in more than four centuries, allowing for more detailed studies than for any other SN. The papers investigate dierent aspects of the SN phenomenon. These individual studies are observationally diverse, but all attempt to an swer dierent questions that are important for our understanding of the SN The properties of the progenitor star set the stage for the SN. Paper III compares SN models based on dierent progenitor stars with early X-ray and gamma-ray observations of SN 1987A. The results help constrain the evolution of the progenitor. In Paper IV, we searched for SN shock break outs (SBOs), which are the rst electromagnetic signals from CCSNe. The discovered candidates convey information about the progenitors, test the SBO theory, and indicate the presence of other types of X-ray transients. The SN explosion mechanism itself is also integral to the analysis in Paper III. The explosion models used in Paper III rely on some of the most recent three-dimensional neutrino-driven SN models. The results lend further support to the hypothesis that delayed neutrino heating is sucient to explode the vast majority of all CCSNe. Much can also be learned about SNe by studying their remnants. The remains of the core, the compact remnant, in SN 1987A has not yet been detected. We have investigated how a compact object can remain hidden in the ejecta in Paper I, using an absorption model from Paper II. We favor a scenario where the compact object is a neutron star that is quiescent, dust obscured, and only emitting thermal emission. Paper V is another study of SN 1987A, but focuses on the X-ray emission from the ongoing interactions between the ejecta and circumstellar medium (CSM). The X-ray emission is primarily generated by thermal processes in shocks produced by collisions between the ejecta and the CSM. We found no evidence for any contribution from relativistic particles or a neutron star. Our description of CCSNe continues to improve but many questions remain unanswered. Future observations will further our knowledge and the models we have studied can be used for continued analyses. The next generation of X-ray missions is very promising and a Galactic SN, which would greatly accelerate the entire research eld, could occur at any time. En karnkollapssupernova (CCSN) ar en astronomisk explosion som indikerar slutet av en massiv stjarnas liv. Fran observationer ar det tydligt att en stor andel av alla massiva stjarnor exploderar som supernovor (SN:or), men att forklara hur SN:or exploderar har kvarstatt som en utmaning under flera decennier. En viktig del av pusslet ar foregangarstjarnans egenskaper. De bifogade artiklarna fokuserar pa att jamfora teoretiska forutsagelser med observationer, primart observationer av SN 1987A. Det ar den narmsta observerade SN:an pa over fyra arhundraden, vilket mojliggor mer detaljer ade studier an av nagon annan SN. Artiklarna studerar olika aspekter av SN-fenomenet. Studierna ar observationellt vitt skilda men adresserar alla fragor som ar viktiga for var forstaelse av SN-processen. Foregangarstjarnans egenskaper ar avgorande for den efterfoljande SN explosionen. Paper III jamfor modeller baserade pa olika foregangarstjar nor med tidiga rontgen- och gamma-observationer av SN 1987A. Resultaten fran studien begransar foregangarstjarnans utveckling. I Paper IV soker vi SN chockutbrott (SBO:s), vilka ar de forsta elektromagnetiska signalerna fran CCSN:or. De upptackta kandidaterna bar information om foregangar stjarnorna, testar SBO-teorin, och indikerar forekomsten av andra typer av Sjalva SN-explosionsmekanismen ar ocksa kritisk for analysen i Paper III. Explosionsmodellerna som anvands i Paper III baseras pa nagra av de senaste tre-dimensionella neutrinodrivna SN-modellerna. Resultaten ger yt terligare stod for hypotesen att fordrojd neutrinoupphettning ar tillracklig for att explodera den overvaldigande majoriteten av alla CCSN:or. SN-rester ger ocksa mycket information om SN-explosioner. Kvarlevorna av den centrala karnan, det kompakta objektet, i SN 1987A har annu inte blivit detekterad. Vi har undersokt hur ett kompakt objekt kan forbli dolt i ejektat i Paper I, med hjalp av en absorptionsmodell fran Paper II. Den mest troliga forklaringen ar att neutronstjarnan ar passiv, stoftskymd, och bara har en termisk emissionskomponent. Paper V ar ytterligare en studie av SN 1987A, men som specikt fokuserar pa rontgenemissionen som uppstar da ejektat interagerar med det cirkumstellara mediet (CSM:et). Rontgen stralningen ar primart producerad av termiska processer i kollisionen mellan ejektat och CSM:et. Vi fann inget stod for nagot bidrag fran relativistiska partiklar eller en neutronstjarna. Var beskrivning av CCSN:or forbattras kontinuerligt men manga fragor ar annu obesvarade. Framtida observationer kommer ge nya ledtradar och de modeller vi har studerat kan anvandas for fortsatta analyser. Nasta generations rontgenteleskop kommer vara valdigt kraftfulla och en galaktisk SN, som skulle vara mycket vardefull for hela forskningsfaltet, kan ske nar Publications Included in the Thesis The 30 Year Search for the Compact Object in SN 1987A Dennis Alp, Josen Larsson, Claes Fransson, Remy Indebetouw, Anders Jerkstrand, Antero Ahola, David Burrows, Peter Challis, Phil Cigan, Alek sandar Cikota, Robert P. Kirshner, Jacco Th. van Loon, Seppo Mattila, C.-Y. Ng, Sangwook Park, Jason Spyromilio, Stan Woosley, Maarten Baes, Patrice Bouchet, Roger Chevalier, Kari A. Frank, B. M. Gaensler, Ha ley Gomez, Hans-Thomas Janka, Bruno Leibundgut, Peter Lundqvist, Jon Marcaide, Mikako Matsuura, Jesper Sollerman, George Sonneborn, Lister Staveley-Smith, Giovanna Zanardo, Michael Gabler, Francesco Taddia, and The Astrophysical Journal 864:174, 2018 DOI: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad739 Authors contribution: The initial outline for this project was conceived by Josen Larsson. I led the work and prepared the vast majority of the pa per. I wrote the entire manuscript except for Section 2.1 and Appendix A. I generated all the gures and tables except for Figures 9 and 10. The re duced ALMA, VLT, and HST data were provided to me by co-authors (I repeated the reduction of the HST data). A co-author also provided the bootstrapped uncertainties for the position presented in Section 3.1. X-Ray Absorption in Young Core-collapse Supernova Remnants Dennis Alp, Josen Larsson, Claes Fransson, Michael Gabler, Annop Wongwathanarat, and Hans-Thomas Janka The Astrophysical Journal 864:175, 2018 DOI: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad737 Authors contribution: This project accompanies Paper I and includes more general results. I led the work, wrote all code, and wrote the entire manuscript except for Section 2.4 and parts of Section 2.5. I generated all gures and tables, except for Figure 1. X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Emission from Core-collapse Supernovae: Com parison of Three-dimensional Neutrino-driven Explosions with SN 1987A Dennis Alp, Josen Larsson, Keiichi Maeda, Claes Fransson, Annop Wong wathanarat, Michael Gabler, Hans-Thomas Janka, Anders Jerkstrand, Alex ander Heger, and Athira Menon The Astrophysical Journal 882:22, 2019 DOI: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab3395 Authors contribution: The initial outline for this project was conceived by Claes Fransson. I led the work and wrote most of the code used for the simulations. I wrote the entire manuscript except for parts of Section 1. I generated all the gures and tables. The simulations related to the W18 and W20 models were performed by Keiichi Maeda. Blasts from the Past: Supernova Shock Breakouts among X-Ray Transients Dennis Alp and Josen Larsson The Astrophysical Journal 896:39, 2020 DOI: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab91ba Authors contribution: The initial outline for this project was conceived by Josen Larsson. I led the work, wrote all of the code, generated all the gures and tables, and wrote the entire manuscript. Thermal Emission and Radioactive Lines, but No Pulsar, in the Broadband X-Ray Spectrum of Supernova 1987A Dennis Alp, Josen Larsson, and Claes Fransson Submitted to The Astrophysical Journal Authors contribution: The initial outline for this project was conceived by me and I am the principal investigator (PI) of the 2020 NuSTAR obser vation. I led the work, wrote all of the code, generated all the gures and tables, and wrote the entire manuscript. Additional Publications not Included in the Thesis High Angular Resolution ALMA Images of Dust and Molecules in the SN Phil Cigan, Mikako Matsuura, Haley L. Gomez, Remy Indebetouw, Fran Abellan, Michael Gabler, Anita Richards, Dennis Alp, Timothy A. Davis, David Burrows, Eli Dwek, Claes Fransson, Peter Lundqvist, J. M. Marcaide, C.-Y. Ng, Hans-Thomas Janka, Jason Spyromilio, M. J. Barlow, Bryan Gaensler, Josen Larsson, P. Bouchet, Sangwook Park, Pat Roche, Jacco Th. van Loon, J. C. Wheeler, and Giovanna Zanardo The Astrophysical Journal 886:51, 2019 DOI: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4b46 The Matter Beyond the Ring: The Recent Evolution of SN 1987A Observed by the Hubble Space Telescope J. Larsson, C. Fransson, D. Alp, P. Challis, R. A. Chevalier, K. France, R. P. Kirshner, S. Lawrence, B. Leibundgut, P. Lundqvist, S. Mattila, K. Migotto, J. Sollerman, G. Sonneborn, J. Spyromilio, N. B. Suntze, and The Astrophysical Journal 886:147, 2019 Properties of gamma-ray decay lines in 3D core-collapse supernova models, with application to SN 1987A and Cas A A. Jerkstrand, A. Wongwathanarat, H.-T. Janka, M. Gabler, D. Alp, R. Diehl, K. Maeda, J. Larsson, C. Fransson, A. Menon and A. Heger Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 494:2471, 2020 I would like to thank my supervisor Josen Larsson for her support and guidance. I truly appreciate the amount of time you dedicate to supervision and your incredible attention to detail. It has greatly facilitated my PhD and made the entire process much smoother. I am also grateful to Claes Fransson for his helpful advice along the way. Finally, I want to thank all other colleagues at Particle and Astroparticle Physics. 1.1 Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.1 Emission Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Absorption Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3 Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4 Nucleosynthesis and Radioactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1 Part of a Cosmic Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2 Core Collapse and Bounce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3 Explosion Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3.1 Delayed Neutrino Heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3.2 Other Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.4 Supernova Remnants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.5 Types of Supernovae and Their Progenitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.6.1 Neutron Star Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.6.2 Accretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.6.4 Thermal Surface Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3D Structure of SNe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.8 SN 1987A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1 General Properties of Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Individual Wavebands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.1 Radio and (sub-)mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.2 Far- and Mid-Infrared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.3 UV, Optical, and NIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2.4 Gamma-Rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.3 Multi-messenger Astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.1 Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.3 Data Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.4 Spectral Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Summary of the Attached Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.2 Paper II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.4 Paper IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.5 Paper V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Conclusions and Future Prospects 7.1 The Compact Object in SN 1987A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.2 Pulsars in Young Supernova Remnants . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.3 Magnetar-driven Superluminous Supernovae . . . . . . . . . 7.4 Supernova Asymmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.5 X-Ray Transients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.6 Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are the violent deaths of massive stars. They are extremely energetic and can shine as brightly as ten billion Suns. CCSN explosions are only triggered in stars that are at least around ten times more massive than the Sun. The driving mechanism that disrupts the stars is only active for around one second, but supernovae (SNe) trap this energy and shine brightly for several months. The remaining energy is dissipated in the subsequent SN remnant (SNR) phase, which can be slowly fading for thousands of years. Each CCSN explosion creates either a neutron star or a black hole and typically expels several solar masses of material into space at velocities of many thousand kilometers per second. CCSNe play several important roles in astrophysics. They are important producers of elements from oxygen to iron, crucially aecting the chemical evolution of galaxies and the Universe. Most of the matter that we see around us has once been synthesized inside a star that expelled the material in a SN explosion. The chemically enriched material that is expelled at high velocities and its kinetic energy shape galaxies. These are the processes that seed the next generation of stars and allow new planets to form. The neutron stars and black holes, which are created by CCSNe, are among the most extreme environments in the Universe. They allow us to test fundamental physics in regimes that are impossible to probe anywhere else. SNe have been observed by ancient astronomers long before they were understood to be astrophysical explosions. Famous historical examples are the Crab Supernova (SN 1054, Figure 1.1), Tychos Supernova (SN 1572; Brahe 1573), and Keplers Supernova (SN 1604; Kepler 1606). The term supernova was coined by Baade and Zwicky (1934), where they also ad vanced the view that a super-nova represents the transition of an ordinary star into a neutron star. Much of the foundations of how elements are Figure 1.1. The two well-observed SNRs Cas A (left) and the Left. NASA/JPL-Caltech, Oliver Krause (Steward Observatory), George H. Rieke (Steward Observatory), Stephan M. Birkmann (Max-Planck-Institut fur Astronomie), Emeric Le Floch (Steward Observatory), Karl D. Gordon (Steward Observatory), Eiichi Egami (Steward Observatory), John Bieging (Steward Observatory), John P. Hughes (Rutgers University), Erick Young (Steward Observatory), Joannah L. Hinz (Steward Observatory), Sascha P. Quanz (Max-Planck-Institut fur Astronomie), Dean C. Hines (Space Science Institute), 9 June 2005 Right. NASA, ESA, STScI, J. Hester and A. Loll (Arizona State University), 1 December 2005 Figure 1.2. Visualizations of 3D SN models based on computer simulations of the neutrino-driven explosion mechanism. The progenitors are a binary merger (left, Menon and Heger, 2017; Menon et al., 2019) and the B15 model (right, Wongwathanarat et al., 2015). The color scales represent the radial velocity. created in stars and SN explosion were developed during the 1950s (Hoyle, 1954; Burbidge et al., 1957; Hoyle and Fowler, 1960). The rst outline of how the liberated gravitational potential energy can be deposited into the envelope and turn a central collapse into an explosion in most SNe was made by Colgate and White (1966), Arnett (1966), and Bethe and Wilson (1985). A particular event of major importance is SN 1987A, which is the closest observed SN in more than four centuries. This has helped advance the eld and allowed for observations of unprecedented detail. Another factor that has helped progress the eld of CCSNe during the past few decades is the rapid development of computational resources, allowing for much more The level of this thesis is set such that it should be accessible to any reader with a background in any eld of physics. This implies that parts of the introduction to subelds specic to astrophysics are at a relatively basic level and that important fundamental concepts are reviewed. The experi enced reader will hopefully nd a couple of interesting notes and alternative perspectives of familiar subjects. One of the critical questions in astrophysics that remains unanswered is how massive stars explode. This has proven to be particularly dicult to solve because CCSNe are highly complex processes, which involve a number of dierent physical phenomena. In fact, it is one of the few physical processes where all four fundamental forces are contributing at signicant levels. The problem is further complicated by the very large dynamic range of timescales and length scales. The evolution of a massive star spans millions of years and the core collapse occurs on timescales of milliseconds. The detailed physics also depends on interactions at a microscopic level in systems that are larger than the Sun. Additionally, CCSNe are clearly three-dimensional (3D) processes (Figure 1.2). As a consequence of the multifaceted physics and dynamic ranges, accurate simulations based on rst principles have remained computationally unfeasible. Over the past decades, dierent theories have evolved to describe dif ferent parts of the explosion process. These theories make observable pre dictions about the properties of the stars just before the explosion, the particles and radiation emitted by the star during the explosion, and what will remain after the bright SN starts to fade. The currently favored ex plosion mechanism is the delayed neutrino-heating mechanism (for reviews, see Janka, Marek and Kitaura, 2007; Janka, Langanke, Marek, Martnez Pinedo and Muller, 2007; Janka, 2012; Burrows, 2013; Muller, 2016; Janka, 2017; Burrows and Vartanyan, 2021). At best, it can successfully describe the explosion of the most common SNe. It is clear that a small number of more extreme SNe require additional processes to be active. Another independent uncertainty is the accuracy of the progenitor models. SN sim ulations are fundamentally initial value problems and cannot be expected to be more accurate than the progenitor models. The aim of the work in this thesis has been to compare predictions of SN theory with observations. The attached papers investigate observables related to SN progenitors, the explosion mechanism, the formation of com pact objects, and interactions between the ejecta and surrounding material. These comparisons allow us to test how accurate the current description of CCSNe is. We have focused on comparing predictions of the delayed neutrino-driven mechanism with observations of SN 1987A. There are sev eral properties of the theory that can be tested observationally, such as if a neutron star or black hole remains after the explosion (Paper I), the 3D structure of the ejecta (Paper II and III), and how the material is mixed in the turbulent explosions (Paper III). We also search for the initial X-ray flashes associated with the onset of the SN explosion (Paper IV) and study the processes present when the SN material collides with the surrounding material (Paper V). These comparisons are a small subset of all observa tional criteria that any successful explosion theory needs to fulll. Readers unfamiliar with astronomy might nd many unusual units and tech nical terms. The purpose of this section is to introduce some of the jargon and mentally prepare the reader for some (sometimes confusing) conven tions. Astronomers generally use centimeter-gram-second (cgs) units but there are also a number of additional units in dierent subelds that have been introduced for special purposes. A list of common units is provided in Table 1.1, and physical and astronomical constants in Table 1.2. Optical fluxes are often given in magnitudes. This is a historic measure of observed flux and must be calibrated using a given zeropoint. Without going into the details, the important properties are that each change of 1 mag corresponds to a change in flux of a factor of 2.5 and the magnitude scale is reversed (brighter objects have lower, more negative, magnitudes). It is worth em phasizing the distinction between magnitude (mag) and order of magnitude (factors of 10). The unit Crab is sometimes used in X-ray instrumentation and is simply the observed flux of the Crab Nebula (Kirsch et al., 2005). This is complicated by the fact that the observed flux varies depending on the given energy interval. The unit beam is mostly used toward longer Table 1.1. Astronomical Units wavelengths and is a measure of the solid angle subtended by each indepen dent spatial measurement. It is the analogue of a pixel for raster (pixelized) Astronomers also label dierent intervals of the electromagnetic spec trum roughly following the conventions in Table 1.3. The dividing lines are not strict and could vary slightly depending on context. trophysicists rarely use the term microwave unless referring to the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). Additionally, micron is sometimes seen in stead of m and the wavenumber (inverse wavelength) can be used on rare occasions, especially in mid-infrared (MIR) and far-infrared (FIR). The def inition of optical emission can also sometimes extend to more or less include ultraviolet (UV) and near-infrared (NIR). Visible light is sometimes used to explicitly refer to the visible part of the spectrum. I will use optical for visible light (i.e. excluding UV and NIR) and use UVOIR to refer to UV, Table 1.2. Physical and Astronomical Constants Several of the bands are also subdivided. One of the most common is the distinction between soft and hard X-rays. The limit between soft and hard depends on context. If the current context is restricted to below 10 keV, soft most likely refers to < 2 keV, whereas soft probably refers to < 10 keV if the context extends to 100 keV. The UV band is sometimes separated into near UV and extreme-UV (or far-UV) and gamma-rays with (much) higher en ergies are often called (very-)high-energy gamma-rays. Lastly, wavelengths of atomic and molecular transitions can be given in both vacuum and air. The wavelengths in air are slightly shorter because of the refractive index of air of 1.0003. Lines are often given in Angstroms, which means that a change of the fourth signicant digit can occur. For example, the important oxygen line at 5007 A can also be reported as 5008 A. Astronomers sometimes simplify the periodic table into hydrogen, he lium, and metals. These can sometimes be denoted X, Y, and Z, respec tively. This means that metals will exclusively be used in this meaning of everything heavier than helium. Heavy metals most likely refers to elements from silicon to around iron. In the context of SNe and SNRs, it is common to refer to the radial position in terms of velocity. This always implicitly assumes that the ejecta Astrometry and photometry are two common astronomical terms. Pho tometry means measuring the flux of objects and is mostly used to refer to flux measurements in UVOIR bands. Astrometry means measuring posi tions in the sky. This may sound simple but dening an accurate coordinate frame is actually rather complicated. The International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) is the standard reference frame. The International Astro nomical Union (IAU) standard is to include the epoch, which is the moment at which the coordinates are valid. The ICRF is a realization of the Interna tional Celestial Reference System (ICRS). The ICRF has coordinates that are xed in space but there are other frames that require an additional time that denes at which moment in time the frame is dened. This time is called the equinox. For example, the coordinate frame that is derived from the Fifth Fundamental Catalogue (FK5) of stars has the standard equinox J2000 (2000 January 1, noon Terrestrial Time). When discussing the distribution of flux over dierent energy bands, it is common to use the term spectral energy distribution (SED) instead of spectrum. It is also common to multiply the flux density measure (y-axis) by the abscissa (x-axis) quantity in SEDs. Power laws are often used to describe spectral shapes. Each power law is characterized by a power-law index. This is often called photon index in X-rays and gamma-rays but can be dened in dierent ways depending on context. The dierences are the sign and if it is giving the shape of the photon number flux density or (energy) flux density, which shifts the photon The purpose of this section is to give readers an overview of the most relevant physical processes. The physical processes are typically covered in physics textbooks, but are important enough for this thesis to warrant a qualitative review. More complete descriptions of these subjects can be found in, e.g., Rybicki and Lightman (1979), Cheng (2005), and Harris (2007). This section covers line emission, bremsstrahlung (braking radiation or free free emission), synchrotron emission, and inverse Compton scattering, which are some of the most common emission processes in astrophysical contexts. Illustrations of the emission processes are provided in Figure 2.1. Elec trons are generally more important than positive ions because of the higher charge-to-mass ratio of electrons. Therefore, the processes are typically thought of as electron-dominated but the following principles apply to par In astrophysical contexts, line emission (Panel I of Figure 2.1) refers to the emission of photons with characteristic energy. The term line refers to the shape of such a spectrum. The photon energy is in most cases determined by dierences in energy levels of an atom when an electron transitions from a level of higher energy to a lower energy level. The excess energy is then emitted as a photon. This means that line emission is a discrete emission process, whereas the other processes in this section are continuum processes. However, the energy of these transitions is not always exactly the same. The primary correction to the photon energy is given by the Doppler shift determined by the relative velocity between the source and the observer. Because blue photons are more energetic than red photons, the Figure 2.1. Illustrations of four important emission processes. The smaller gray spheres are electrons and the larger black spheres are protons (or any positive nucleus in general). Dashed lines are electron trajectories, the solid black line represents a magnetic eld, photons are indicated by waves, and energy lev els are illustrated by dotted lines. Line emission (Panel I) occurs when an electron transitions from a higher to a lower energy level in an atom. Bremsstrahlung (or free-free emission, Panel II) is the emission produced by a free electron that is deflected by a positive ion. Synchrotron radiation (Panel III) is produced by a fast electron gyrating in a magnetic eld. Inverse Compton scattering (Panel IV) is when a fast electron interacts with a photon and transfers energy from the electron to the photon. See Section 2.1 for details about the emission processes. IIIIIIIV 2.1. Emission Processes terms blueshift and redshift are often used to denote emission that has been Doppler boosted to higher and lower energies, respectively. It is very common to perform measurements of the Doppler shifts of lines to determine the velocity of an object along the line of sight (radial velocity). Another important property of emission lines is their widths, which are determined by the radial velocity distribution of the individual atoms or macroscopic objects that constitute the source. In most cases, this is dominated by the thermal motion of atoms or the random motions of constituting objects. However, in SNe, the widths of the lines are dominated by the bulk motion of the outflow of the material from the center of the explosion. This means that material that is bluer is on the near side, whereas the redder emission originates from the far side. In addition to the energy shift and line width, the line prole is sometimes discussed. This is essentially just analyzing the distribution of the emission at dierent line-of-sight velocities. Bremsstrahlung (Panel II of Figure 2.1) involves a fast electron being deflected by a positively charged ion. This is often described in the frame where the ion is stationary and the incoming electron is moving, which is generally a good approximation of the observers frame because electrons are moving much faster than the heavier ions. The acceleration of the electron as it travels through the electric potential leads to the emission of a photon and a corresponding energy decrease of the electron. In typical astrophysical contexts, the emission is characterized by the electron density and energy distribution, as well as the ion density. Notable properties are that the emission depends on the product of the density of the electrons and the ions, and that the photon energy depends on the electron energy. Synchrotron emission (Panel III of Figure 2.1) is the emission produced by a relativistic electron (see Section 2.3) in the presence of a magnetic eld. The acceleration that gives rise to the helical path also gives rise to photons with frequencies proportional to the gyration frequency and speed of the electron. The total power emitted is a function of particle density, the square of the particle energy distribution, and the square of the magnetic eld strength. This process is also called cyclotron emission if the particle Inverse Compton scattering (Compton 1923, Panel IV of Figure 2.1) is not strictly an emission process in the sense that photons are created. Instead, inverse Compton is when a high-energy electron interacts with a previously existing low-energy photon and transfers some of the energy from the electron to the photon. This means that any eld of low-energy photons could be reprocessed into high-energy photons by high-energy electrons, which is why inverse Compton scattering is often categorized as an emission Importantly, the opposite scenario where a high-energy photon imparts energy to a lower-energy electron is also possible. However, this is often considered an absorption process called Compton scattering (see Lastly, it is worth pointing out that blackbody (thermal) emission is not an emission process even though it is often used to describe the emission of a source. Blackbody emission is emission from an opaque, non-reflective source in thermodynamic equilibrium with its environment. Blackbody emission does not specify how the photons are created. A characteristic is that the escaping spectrum is uniquely determined by the temperature of the source. This is because the emitter is opaque and the photons are free to exchange energy with the surroundings, which means that the photons will adopt an energy distribution determined by allowed quantum states that are solely dependent on the temperature (Blundell and Blundell, 2010). This section covers Compton scattering, photoelectric absorption (photoab sorption), and dust absorption, which are common absorption processes in astrophysical contexts. Illustrations of the emission processes are provided in Figure 2.2. When discussing absorption, it is common to refer to the interaction cross section. This is a measure of how likely the absorption process is and is analogous to the classical cross section of macroscopic Compton scattering (Panel I of Figure 2.2, see also Paper III) is simply the opposite of inverse Compton scattering (Section 2.1). In the context of this thesis, primarily Compton scattering is of importance because it is the dominating interaction channel for photons with energies in the range of 30 keV3 MeV. Throughout this energy range, the interaction cross section per electron remains relatively constant. This means that (neutral) heavier elements have Compton scattering cross sections that are proportional to the atomic number. Another important property is that Compton scat tering does not destroy photons, whereas both photoabsorption and dust Photoelectric absorption (Einstein 1905a, Panel II of Figure 2.2, see also Paper II and III) is the process by which a photon is destroyed by an electron that is originally bound to an atom. The electron gets unbound by the incoming energy (which is why photoabsorption is also referred to as bound-free absorption) and the excess energy is converted into kinetic energy of the electron. For SN remnants, photoabsorption is important because it is the dominating absorption channel for photons with energies of 0.0130 keV. The photoabsorption cross section is very sensitive to both the atomic number of the absorbing atom and the photon energy. The cross Illustrations of three important absorption pro cesses. The smaller gray spheres are electrons and the larger black sphere is a proton (or any positive nucleus in general). Dashed lines are electron trajectories, photons are indicated by waves, energy levels are illustrated by dotted lines, and the irreg ular gray blobs represent dust. Compton scattering (Panel I) is when a photon scatters o an electron and transfers energy from the photon to the electron. Photoelectric absorption (Panel II) is the process in which a photon is absorbed by an atom and the energy goes into a bound electron, which is liberated by the energy. Dust absorption (Panel III) refers to the absorption of photons by small particles consisting of a large number of atoms. See Section 2.2 for details about the absorption processes. section steeply increases as the atomic number cubed but quickly drops toward higher energies as the inverse of the energy cubed. Gas, Molecules, Dust, and Grains Before outlining the properties of dust absorption, it is important to make a distinction between the dierent components of matter in SN remnants. Gas almost always refers to gas dominated by monatomic gas, which may or may not be an ionized plasma. If the material consists of molecules such as CO, SiO, H2, it would most likely be referred to as molecules, even though it is in a gaseous phase. Grains and dust both refer to small particle solids of a few atoms to a few microns in (linear) size. The compositions of these grains are often uncertain but they are most likely composed of elements that are abundant on Earth in solid compounds, such as carbon, oxygen, silicon, and iron. For intuition, in everyday life, these grains are more likely to be called soot or ne sand. Dust absorption (Panel III of Figure 2.2) is not strictly a physical ab sorption process at a microphysical level. However, because dust is ubiqui tous in space and the composition is poorly constrained, it is customary to model the dust absorption by a parametrized absorption prole (Cardelli et al., 1989). Dust absorption is most important at UV wavelengths and gradually decreases at longer wavelengths (Draine, 2003). The purpose of this section is to introduce a number of relativistic eects without going into the theory of relativity. An important prediction of special relativity (Einstein, 1905b) is that nothing can move faster than the speed of light in vacuum. The (kinetic) energy of an object can be arbitrarily high, but the velocity will only tend toward the speed of light as the energy goes to innity. Special relativity also describes the relation that relates energy E of an object to its mass m by the speed of light in vacuum c. This is important in a number of astrophysical contexts because some processes are capable of converting a signicant fraction of the mass into energy. It is also common to describe particles as relativistic or non relativistic. This depends on context but is roughly when the (classical) kinetic energy is equal to the mc2 energy. General relativity (Einstein, 1916) only introduces signicant corrections to Newtonian gravity (Newton, 1687) in very strong gravitational elds. This only happens in relatively few systems in the Universe. Two examples that are connected to SNe are neutron stars and black holes (see Section 3.6). One consequence of general relativity is that measured quantities are dif ferent in dierent frames and there are two particularly important frames. First, the local frame is where quantities are measured at the position of the massive object. These quantities can be denoted local, intrinsic, un redshifted, or actual. Second, the observers frame is at innity, which implies far from the deep parts of the gravitational well. These quantities are denoted redshifted, observed, or at innity. The magnitude of the general relativistic eects for a neutron star is conveniently parametrized by the gravitational redshift parameter (Sec is the Schwarzschild radius, M the mass, R the radius of the neutron star, and G the gravitational constant. For example, gr = 0.8 at the surface for typical neutron star parameters where gr = 1 implies flat spacetime. Let the quantities in the observers frame be denoted by subscript , then the eects on some common quantities are as follows:  Length (e.g. radius or photon wavelength) R = R/gr  Time (dierences) t = t/gr Additionally, masses are not uniquely dened in some contexts. For neu tron stars, it is common to refer to both gravitational and baryonic masses (see Section 5.1 of Zhang et al., 2008). Gravitational mass is the mass that enters into Newtons law of gravity to describe the gravitational potential (at distances not too close to the source). The baryonic mass is the mass that would be measured if you took all particles from the compact object and moved each particle to innity (very far away from the source) and then measured its mass. For neutron stars, the gravitational and baryonic masses could be dierent. This is because a substantial fraction of the mass energy of a neutron star is converted into negative gravitational potential energy when the neutron star forms. Imagine a particle falling into a very deep gravitational well. The particle would liberate negative gravitational potential energy and convert it into kinetic energy as it accelerates into the well. In a simplied picture of neutron star formation, this kinetic energy is converted into heat that is subsequently radiated away, which leaves only the negative gravitational potential energy. By the mass-energy equivalence [Equation (2.1)], this means that the sum of the original baryonic mass is higher than the gravitational mass, which is the sum of the baryonic mass (the stu that actually makes up the star) and the negative gravitational potential energy. For typical neutron star parameters, the ratio of grav itational to baryonic mass is around 0.9 [Equation (36) of Lattimer and Mass Dierence and Binding Energy It is no coincidence that the ratio of gravitational to baryonic mass is similar to the gravitational redshift factor. The Newtonian binding energy for a homogeneous sphere is where the mass-energy equivalence [Equation (2.1)] was used in the last step and Mb is the mass corresponding to the binding energy. On the other hand, from Equations (2.2) and (2.3), we have that where the approximation holds for RS (cid:28) R. From this, it is clear that gr is approximately the ratio of baryonic to gravitational mass, except for a factor of order unity. 2.4 Nucleosynthesis and Radioactivity Nucleosynthesis means the combination of nucleons into new nuclei. Stel lar nucleosynthesis powers stars, which are stable thermonuclear furnaces throughout their lives (Prialnik, 2000). They are held together by self gravity and the high pressures and temperatures allow for the atoms in the core of the star to undergo fusion. Energy is released by fusing lighter ele ments into heavier elements up to 56Fe. Energy is liberated by increasing  2.4. Nucleosynthesis and Radioactivity the (negative) nuclear binding energy. However, combining elements heav ier than 56Fe results in a net energy loss because 56Fe has the lowest mass per nucleon1. This means that the stable thermonuclear fusion chain starts with hydrogen burning and ends once 56Fe has formed. Explosive or SN nucleosynthesis occurs during the rst few seconds after the onset of the explosion (Hix and Harris, 2017). The radioactive elements created during this period are of particular importance because they are the primary power sources for the subsequent phases. When a radioactive element decays, the atomic nucleus loses energy by emitting particles or radiation. To avoid confusion, I emphasize the dierence between half-life (often denoted T1/2) and lifetime (often denoted  ). The half-life is the time after which half the original number remains, and the lifetime is equivalent to an e-folding time (decreased by a factor of e  2.71828). It is also worth noting that, in nuclear physics, helium nuclei are frequently referred to as  particles, electrons as  particles, and positrons as + particles2. It is common not to make a distinction between the emission from the decay, and from prompt emission by the daughter nucleus. For example, the as trophysically important lines at 67.87 and 78.39 keV (Grebenev et al., 2012; Grefenstette et al., 2014; Boggs et al., 2015) are often referred to as 44Ti lines, even though they are promptly emitted as a result of nuclear tran sitions of 44Sc, which is the daughter product of 44Ti. Nuclear transitions imply transitions in the energy levels of nucleons, and not the analogue for electrons, which are more commonly observed. The transition 44Ti  44Sc itself is an electron capture transition, which is when p + e  n + e. 1The isotope 62Ni has the highest binding energy per nucleon (not contradicting be cause of the dierence in proton and neutron mass), which is not formed because it has no prominent formation channel in stars. 2This naturally explains the term -rays, which is another common product of nuclear There are dierent types of SNe that are divided into dierent categories depending on which process triggers the explosion. This thesis focuses on CCSNe that are triggered by the collapse of the central iron core. I em phasize the period from just before core collapse to the early SNR phase because of its relevance for this thesis. It is important to highlight that SNe are part of a cosmic cycle that involves the births, evolutions, and deaths of stars (Figure 3.1). The cycle is com pleted by the formation of the next generation of stars, which are seeded by the deaths of the previous generation. An arbitrary starting point of the cosmic cycle can be taken to be the interstellar medium (ISM, Draine 2003). For an evolved galaxy, such as the Milky Way, the ISM constitutes approximately 10 % of the baryonic mass (i.e., excluding dark matter). The physics of the ISM is in itself very rich and diverse. One of the most im portant connections between the ISM and other astrophysical phenomena Exactly how stars form remains one of the open questions in modern astrophysics. The challenge is to describe how the ISM with a mean number density of around 1 cm3 collapses to densities on the order of 1026 cm3, which is the number density in the center of the Sun. The problem consists of overcoming both the gas pressure and magnetic pressure, as well as how the angular momentum is transferred outward. The next step of the cycle is stellar evolution (Prialnik, 2000). This is more closely connected to SNe because the last stages of stellar evolution determine the initial conditions for CCSNe. Of particular relevance for SNe Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae Figure 3.1. Illustration of the life cycle of massive stars. I. ESO/S. Guisard (www.eso.org/~sguisard), CC BY 4.0 III. ESO/L. Calcada, CC BY 4.0 Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ IIIIIIIVV 3.1. Part of a Cosmic Cycle Figure 3.2. Cross-section of a massive star showing the 1D model with stratied layers of individual nuclear burning stages. The thicknesses of the dierent layers are also not to scale. The size of the iron core is on the order of 104 km and the radius of the star is on the order of 108 km. Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae is the evolution of massive stars. The most basic description of the evolution of stars relies on one-dimensional (1D) models (Figure 3.2) and simplied treatments of the involved physics. This approach has successfully described many of the general properties of stars. They are essentially self-gravitating clouds of plasma with high enough temperatures and pressures in the inner regions to sustain thermonuclear fusion. These simplied 1D models predict that the structure of stars is stratied with progressively heavier elements toward the center. However, the evolution of the late stages of massive stars is more complicated than what is captured by simplied 1D models. The most important parameters are initial mass, rotation, metallicity, and the eects of magnetic elds. In addition, many massive stars evolve as a part of an interacting binary system. To simulate these processes, it is necessary to capture physics ranging from very short to very long spatial and temporal scales. These factors make detailed descriptions of stellar evolution very The following stages that involve the explosion and subsequent evolution of the young SNR are explained in more detail in Sections 3.23.4. Here, it is simply noted that the nal fate of the supernova is that the remnant fades away and merges with the ISM. The end result is that much of the material of the star is returned to the ISM. This is one of the main drivers of the chemical evolution of the Universe (Woosley et al., 2002). The kinetic energy deposited into the ISM also helps trigger the formation of the next generation of stars and planets. The SNR evolution spans over timescales of millions of years and the remnants expand to radii on the order of 100 ly. An interesting point is that SNe occur roughly once every century in galaxies similar to the Milky Way. From these numbers, it is clear that SNRs will cover a large fraction of the total volume of a galaxy (McKee and Ostriker, 1977). This implies that SNRs are vital for shaping the ISM environment The study of SNe from the onset of core collapse to an outward explosion has received much attention over the past decades (Janka, Marek and Ki taura, 2007; Janka, Langanke, Marek, Martnez-Pinedo and Muller, 2007; Janka, 2012; Burrows, 2013; Muller, 2016; Janka, 2017; Burrows and Var tanyan, 2021). CCSNe are termed core collapse because they are triggered by the core of the star crossing a mass limit determined by the electron degeneracy pressure. Degeneracy pressure arises from the Pauli exclusion principle, which states that fermions cannot occupy the same quantum state simultaneously. Eectively, this implies that astrophysical objects that are  3.2. Core Collapse and Bounce dense enough experience an additional pressure as a result of quantum me chanics, which prevents further gravitational compression. When the limit is crossed, the core cannot withstand the force of gravity. This process is self-enhancing, so once the collapse has started, the core and all outer layers keep collapsing into a neutron star. The newly formed neutron star halts the contraction, which expels the outer layers. This is what then appears as a SN to observers. However, if neutron degeneracy pressure is overcome, the star keeps contracting into a black hole. Once the core collapse is initiated, the contraction increases the tem perature. The temperature increase leads to photodissociation of heavy nuclei into -particles, and, subsequently, ssioning -particles into indi vidual nucleons, eectively depositing the energy released when fusing the heavy nuclei. The photodissociation acts as an energy sink, which lowers the temperature and facilitates further collapse. Thus, these eects com bine to form a positive feedback loop. Throughout this process, electrons are captured by protons, which form neutrons and electron neutrinos. The neutrinos are able to escape freely during the collapse phase. The collapse continues until neutron degeneracy pressure dominates, halting the collapse and forming a neutron star, or, if neutron degeneracy is overcome, contract ing further into a black hole. Gravitational Potential Energy Fundamentally, CCSNe are powered by gravitational potential en ergy released by the contracting core. The energy liberated by ex plosive nucleosynthesis contributes at most a small fraction of the released energy (Burrows, 2013). A simple back-of-the-envelope cal culation can be made by computing the change in gravitational po tential energy of the core. For a typical initial radius of 10,000 km, a nal radius of 10 km, and a mass of 1 M(cid:12), Equation (2.4) gives a change of binding energy of more than 1053 erg. Thus, the re maining question is how to convert approximately a few percent of the released gravitational potential energy into the observed SNe A characteristic of CCSNe is the bounce shock associated with the re bound of the infalling matter when the proto-neutron star (PNS) is formed. When the core density reaches nuclear densities of 1014 g cm3, neutron degeneracy pressure overtakes the other forces at play and the equation of state suddenly stiens within less than a millisecond (Burrows, 2013). This is potent enough to reverse the infall to some degree by sending a shock outwards and was thought to possibly prompt the ejection of the stellar Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae mantle, i.e. trigger the SN explosion. Therefore, the bounce-shock mecha nism attracted much attention in the 1980s (Bethe, 1990). However, the current consensus is that bounce-shock alone is insucient to describe the explosion of any star (Janka, 2012; Burrows, 2013; Muller, 2016). The shock is launched from an enclosed mass of 0.5 M(cid:12), keeps propagating outward for 70 ms, and reaches a peak radius of 100200 km before turning into an accretion shock with negative radial velocity. Energy is tapped out of the escaping shock through photodissociation of infalling heavy nuclei. Practically all modern simulations indicate that this is the nal fate for the bounce-shock mechanism, i.e. stagnation deep inside the core of the star (e.g. Mezzacappa et al., 2001). Nevertheless, even though the bounce-shock mechanism fails to explode the star, it has important consequences for subsequent processes. 3.3.1 Delayed Neutrino Heating Presentations (especially visualizations) of SNe often focus on the high luminosity, which is to say the electromagnetic radiation. How ever, the total radiated energy in ordinary SNe is on the order of 1049 erg (e.g. Lyman et al. 2016, Dastidar et al. 2018). This is only around 1 % of the total kinetic energy, which is on the order of 1051 erg (e.g. Janka et al. 2017 and references therein). The kinetic energy is also the energy that is customarily referred to as the explo sion energy. As shown in Section 3.2, the total liberated energy is on the order of 1053 erg. Approximately 99 % of this energy escapes as neutrinos whereas the small fraction that is absorbed powers the The timescales are also quite dierent from the intuitive notion of an explosion. Whether or not the star collapses into a black hole, or explodes and leaves a neutron star is determined during the rst second after the bounce. The structure of the ejecta is determined during the rst few hours. The hydrodynamic processes of the heated ejecta are in some aspects quite similar to boiling water. All of this happens before the SN becomes immensely bright, which is what SNe are most known for. The radiation escapes on timescales of tens of days because of the time it takes for photons to escape the thick envelope and the continuous expansion of the ejecta. Much of the modern research has been committed to the study of the revival of the initial bounce shock through neutrino heating, often referred to as the delayed neutrino-driven mechanism (Colgate and White, 1966; Arnett, 1966; Bethe and Wilson, 1985). Neutrino heating is the frontrunner among the studied explosion mechanisms even though currently far from all progenitors can be satisfyingly modeled. In the wake of the bounce shock, the so-called gain radius emerges. For radii smaller than the gain radius, neutrinos cool, whereas neutrinos heat for larger radii (Bethe and Wilson, 1985). Eventually, the pressure behind the shock is sucient to give rise to an outward expansion, eectively reviving the stalled shock. The amount of dissociated nucleons exposed to strong neutrino heating behind the shock keeps increasing because of matter being accreted through the shock front and an increasing shock radius. These eects combined turns neutrino heating into a partly self-enhancing runaway It has been concluded that neutrino heating is insucient to explode spherically symmetric stars (e.g. Fischer et al. 2010). However, it is estab lished that SNe are highly asymmetrical, being anisotropic from the very rst moments of explosions as shown in Figures 1.1 and 1.2. Whether or not multi-dimensional, particularly 3D, simulations result in successful ex plosions through neutrino driving is still an area of active research. It has been shown that convection and instabilities lower the luminosity required for an explosion in multiple dimensions by 1250 % (recent work seems to favor values in the lower end of the interval), with respect to one dimension (Nordhaus et al., 2010; Hanke et al., 2012; Fernandez, 2015; Muller and Janka, 2015; Muller et al., 2016). Going beyond 1D qualitatively alters the conditions for eects such as convection and non-radial sloshing motions. These hydrodynamical instabil ities evolve during the very rst moments of the explosion and play a critical role in neutrino driving (Herant et al., 1992, 1994; Burrows et al., 1995; Fryer and Warren, 2002, 2004). Comparisons between 1D and two-dimensional (2D) simulations focused on instabilities have been made, showing that 2D instabilities can be decisive for a successful explosion (Buras et al., 2006; Marek and Janka, 2009). However, it is possible to nd plenty of cases of both failed (e.g. Hanke et al., 2013; Tamborra et al., 2014) and successful (e.g. Takiwaki et al., 2014; Melson et al., 2015; Lentz et al., 2015) explosions How instabilities aid neutrino driving is a highly complex process. Ef fects such as radial Rayleigh-Taylor ngers convect freshly heated material from the gain layer further out towards the shock and lets newly infallen matter down into the heating region. This leads to an overall increase of temperature and pressure in the gain region, which in turn pushes the Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae shock outwards. Altogether, it is believed that this triggers a self-sustaining feedback loop, which eventually leads to the expulsion of the stellar man tle (Couch and Ott, 2013; Couch et al., 2015). In contrast, the non-radial mass flows dissipate kinetic energy in the form of heat, indirectly boosting the outward, radial expansion and convective activity (Scheck et al., 2008; The large-scale asymmetries naturally originate from initial seed pertur bations. In particular, it has been advocated that strong seed perturbations in the infalling oxygen or silicon shells indirectly enhances neutrino driving (Arnett and Meakin, 2011; Couch and Ott, 2013; Muller and Janka, 2015; Couch et al., 2015; Muller et al., 2016). A 3D explosion simulation used the 3D initial conditions from Muller et al. (2017) and used 1D initial con ditions as a reference. It was concluded that the shock was revived using 3D initial conditions and that the 1D initial conditions yield no explosion (Muller, 2016; Muller et al., 2017). However, there are SNe that are signicantly more luminous than stan dard SNe (see Section 3.5). This is a problem for the delayed neutrino heating mechanism because neutrino-driven simulations indicate that a few times 1051 erg might be an upper limit to the explosion energy that can be achieved. Additionally, even though neutrino heating might be the lead ing hypothesis, the viability of delayed neutrino heating to explode the less extreme SNe is also not generally accepted. Magnetorotational mechanism (MRM) is a magnetohydrodynamic eect that was, in its most fundamental form, developed during the 1970s (Bis novatyi-Kogan, 1970; Ostriker and Gunn, 1971; Meier et al., 1976; Bisnova tyi-Kogan et al., 1976). The basic concept is that a nascent PNS has a high rate of rotation, close to the critical rotation of 1 ms. Any signi cantly faster rotation would render gravity unable to hold the neutron star together. A strong magnetic eld is also required, approximately 1015 G or more. Rotational energy from the PNS is then transferred into the man tle, depositing enough kinetic energy into the outer stellar layers for it to be expelled, resulting in a SN explosion. Modern simulations have veried that the outlined process is a viable method for expelling the outer layers (Burrows et al., 2007). It is worth mentioning that MRM may power the progenitors of long gamma-ray bursts (MacFadyen and Woosley, 1999). However, because MRM requires a high spin, it is relatively straightfor ward to compare pulsar spins with those predicted by MRM theory. Results show that only less than 1% of pulsars are possible MRM SN remnants. So, even if MRM is a viable mechanism, it is constrained to a very small population. Therefore, an attractive hypothesis is that MRM powers the most luminous SNe that have the most rapidly rotating cores (Burrows, Alternative suggestions to neutrino heating for standard SNe involve collapse-induced thermonuclear explosions (Burbidge et al., 1957) and jet driven explosions (Soker, 2010). Kushnir and Katz (2015) showed that thermonuclear explosions are possible for some (tuned) progenitors in 1D simulations. More nely tuned models indicate that it is possible to obtain kinetic energies in the range 10491052 erg in 2D thermonuclear explosion simulations (Blum and Kushnir, 2016). The jet mechanism relies on the formation of jets by the material infalling onto the nascent neutron star just after the core collapse to explode the star (Soker, 2017a,b). The transition of a SN to a SNR is often taken to be the time when the emission is dominated by interactions with the surroundings rather than the decay of radioactive elements created by the explosive nucleosynthesis in the SN explosion. SNe eject large amounts of matter into space with typical total kinetic energies of 1051 erg. Ejecta masses are normally in the range 420 M(cid:12). This means that a typical velocity is 3000 km s1, which is signicantly higher than the sound speed of the surroundings. The result is that a shock wave expands through the circumstellar medium (CSM). The shock surface serves as the eective boundary of a SNR, which includes the shock and the ejecta inside of it. Fundamentally, the SNR covers the time span during which the kinetic energy of the bulk motion is reprocessed into other forms (Lopez and Fesen, 2018). The evolutionary stage of a SNR is often categorized depending on the dominating physical processes (Draine, 2011; Vink, 2012). The important physical parameters for the evolution of the ejecta are density, pressure, temperature, and kinetic energy. This is further complicated by asymme tries in the ejecta and surrounding material. It is possible that parts of the ejecta are still expanding freely whereas other parts of the ejecta already have lost most of their kinetic energy. The free-expansion (or ejecta-dominated) phase is the rst phase after the explosion and lasts roughly until the swept-up mass exceeds the ejecta mass. This is the only phase relevant to this thesis. Typical velocities of the fastest SN ejecta are on the order of 104 km s1, which is signicantly higher than the local sound speed of 10 km s1. Furthermore, the ejecta density at early phases is much higher than the CSM density. This results in a blast wave propagating outward while the ejecta expand approximately freely. For a given ejecta mass Mej, CSM density n0, and explosion energy Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae E51, it is possible to compute the time at which the swept-up mass exceeds the ejecta mass (Draine, 2011) Once the swept-up mass is comparable to the ejecta mass, the pressure in the shell of shocked CSM roughly exceeds the thermal pressure of the ejecta. This sends a reverse shock inward, which slows and heats the ejecta. It is worth pointing out that the reverse shock propagates inward as measured in mass coordinate, which means that it is reaching more of the inner mass. However, the reverse shock could still be expanding outward in space, but with a lower radial velocity than the ejecta at that radius. Throughout the free-expansion phase, the density drops as t3, and the part of the ejecta inside of the reverse shock cools due to adiabatic expansion until the reverse shock reaches it and shock heats it. Cas A (Figure 1.1, left) is an example of a relatively young and nearby SNR formed by a SN that was possibly observed by John Flamsteed on 16 August 1680 (Flamsteed, 1725; Kamper, 1980; Hughes, 1980; Ashworth, 1980). The neutron star created by the SN was detected in the rst light images of Chandra (Tananbaum, 1999; Pavlov et al., 2000; Chakrabarty et al., 2001) and does not contribute to the emission of the SNR. This means that the radiation is powered by the conversion of kinetic energy In contrast, most of the energy input in the Crab Nebula comes from the Crab Pulsar (Figure 1.1, right). This type of nebula is sometimes referred to as a pulsar wind nebula (PWN). In Cas A, the X-ray emission is mainly bremsstrahlung emission that originates from gas heated by the reverse shock. The UVOIR is instead dominated by line emission. In the shocked region, the atoms are ionized by collisions with thermal electrons. The unshocked interior material is pho toionized by UV and X-ray photons from the shock-heated gas with tem peratures of several million degrees Kelvin (Milisavljevic and Fesen, 2015). Cas A is a strong synchrotron source and is the brightest radio (below 100 GHz) source outside of the solar system. 3.5 Types of Supernovae and Their Even the SNe that arise from the collapse of the iron core of massive stars are subdivided into several subclasses based on the observed properties. The classication scheme (see Figure 3.3 for an illustration) is important because SNe are often referred to by their classes. The label also carries information  3.5. Types of Supernovae and Their Progenitors Figure 3.3. CCSN classication scheme. See Section 3.5 for more details on the dierent SN types and their progenitors. about dierent physical and observational properties. The dierent types are also closely related to dierent progenitor types. Much eort has been devoted to the association of dierent types of SNe with observations of dierent progenitors, but this is a challenging task and is relatively certain only for some classes (Smartt, 2009). Most of the dening properties are based on features in optical spectra and light curves. A review of the clas sication of all classes of SNe was recently made by Gal-Yam (2017). It is worth emphasizing that capitalization is important (i.e. the labels are case The SNe that show strong signs of hydrogen are classied as Type II SNe. Most of these are Type II-P (plateau) SNe. The plateau refers to a period after the peak during which the brightness stays relatively constant. Those that show a linear decline post-peak are instead termed Type II-L. The decline rate is practically always measured in magnitudes per unit time, so linear actually refers to an exponential decline in flux. There are also SNe that initially show hydrogen signs but later transition into strong helium lines. These are denoted Type IIb. Type II-P SNe are thought to originate from red supergiants (RSGs). Red here refers to the surface color and is essentially a measure of temper ature. The density and radii have important consequences for the observed emission from SNe. A simplied picture is that SN progenitors are very lu Hydrogen?No, Type IYes, Type IIHelium?Weak hydrogen?YesNoType IbBroad lines?Type Ic-BLType IcType IIbNarrow lines?YesNoType IInLight curve shapeSlow-rising, SN 1987A-likePlateauLinearType II-pecType II-PType II-LYesNoYesNo 30 Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae minous, which means that red stars need much larger radii to emit the same amount of power as a hotter star. Therefore, RSGs have radii of 1000 R(cid:12), whereas blue supergiants (BSGs) have radii of a few times 10 R(cid:12). This is primarily a manifestation of dierent densities because the total masses of BSGs and RSGs are overlapping. Type IIb SNe are explosions of stars that have lost much of their hydro gen envelope. It is possible that Type II-L also represents a class of SNe that has lost part of the hydrogen. The hydrogen could be continuously shed o by the star through its evolution or it could be reduced through interactions with a binary companion. The consequences for the SN explosion are that the ejected mass is lower and the expansion velocity is higher. Both of these factors decrease the optical depth of the ejecta and allow more emission to CCSNe can also lack signs of hydrogen, in which case they are classied as Type Ib. Additionally, there is a Type Ic class for the SNe that also show no signs of helium. These are thought to have lost their outer envelopes through binary interactions. This strips o the lighter elements and only leaves the heavier elements in the inner regions. For completeness, there is also a class called Type Ia, but these are not the result of core collapses in There are also many more subclasses, such as Type Ic-BL (broad-lined), superluminous SNe (SLSNe), Type IIn (narrow), and Type II-pec (peculiar). Type Ic-BL SNe are similar to regular Type Ic but show broader spectral lines and are thought to be connected to long-duration gamma-ray bursts. Type IIn SNe show narrow hydrogen lines that arise from ejecta interacting with the CSM. SLSNe are simply more luminous than normal SNe, often by more than a factor of 100 (Gal-Yam, 2019). Both Type IIn and SLSNe are classes that encompass SNe of more than one physical origin. The Type II-pec are sometimes also called long-rising, slow-rising, or SN 1987A like (after the archetype SN 1987A). In contrast to Type II-P, these originate from BSGs and possibly also intermediate yellow supergiants (Taddia et al., 2016). Their slow rises are the results of their more compact structures. A nal note is that these denitions are not clear-cut. For example, it has been argued that very weak signs of hydrogen can be seen in spectra of Ib SNe and that these should be included in the Type IIb class. Additionally, the distinction between Type II-P and II-L is more continuous than what The compact remnants of SN explosions are expected to be neutron stars or black holes. Neutron stars are primarily characterized by their mass, radius, spin (rotational period), and magnetic eld strength, whereas only the mass and spin are of astrophysical relevance for black holes. In addition to the characteristics that are intrinsic to the object, the kick (velocity imparted during the explosion) and interaction with the surroundings are important observational properties and laboratories for extreme physical phenomena. A successful CCSN requires the formation of a neutron star, but it is possible that a small fraction of all SNe is fallback SNe (e.g. Ertl et al., 2016; Sukhbold et al., 2016). Fallback SNe are those that form a neutron star but subsequent fallback of material onto the neutron star makes it collapse into a black hole. These SNe are predicted to be fainter than the SNe that form stable neutron star remnants. It is also possible for a massive star to collapse into a black hole with no associated explosion. These black holes are referred to as direct collapse black holes and the collapses are classied as failed SNe, which are not strictly a type of SNe. Detecting stars the directly implode into black holes is much more challenging. No unambiguous detection has been made but two candidates have recently been reported (Reynolds et al., 2015; Adams et al., 2017). One of the predictions for these formation channels is that successful explosions should leave neutron stars with masses of 12 M(cid:12) and the black holes should generally have masses above 5 M(cid:12). The mass gap between 25 M(cid:12) is thus simply a consequence of the lack of formation channel for objects in the mass gap, which most likely would be black holes. There is relatively robust observational evidence of the mass gap (Farr et al., 2011) and it was replicated reasonably well in a study of remnants in 200 CCSN simulations by Sukhbold et al. (2016). 3.6.1 Neutron Star Properties Neutron stars constitute a very diverse group of objects but they all share some general properties. Neutron stars have masses in the range 12 M(cid:12), radii of 1013 km, and spin periods of a millisecond to tens of seconds ( Ozel and Freire, 2016). Because of general relativistic eects, the quantities are dependent on where the measurement is performed and how much internal energy that remains contained by the neutron star (see Section 2.3). A very rough estimation of the dierence by measuring the intrinsic properties is a relative change of 20 % for most quantities. Neutron stars also interact with the environment, which is the supernova remnant for young neutron stars. The surface magnetic eld strengths of neutron stars are ranging from 109 to 1015 G. The magnetic eld is often modeled as a rotating dipole in vacuum (Gunn and Ostriker, 1969), but more accurate descriptions are still being developed (e.g. Spitkovsky, 2006). The magnetic elds act on the environment because neutron stars are rotating Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae and the magnetic and rotational axes are generally not aligned. Faucher Gigu`ere and Kaspi (2006) estimated that the birth periods of typical pulsars are 300 150 ms. We note that the value is based on available observations of Galactic pulsars and that it is model-dependent. Highly model-dependent estimates of extreme, extragalactic SNe indicate that a small fraction of all SNe produce neutron stars with spin periods between 1 and 10 ms (Nicholl et al., 2017; Blanchard et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2021). Typical natal kick velocities of pulsars are on average 400 km s1 but can be even larger than 1000 km s1 in some cases (Hobbs et al., 2005; Faucher-Gigu`ere and Kaspi, 2006). A possible explanation for the kicks is that the ejecta is expelled asymmetrically, which requires a velocity to be imparted to the neutron star to conserve momentum (Scheck et al., 2006; Wongwathanarat et al., 2010; Janka, 2017). Thus, kicks serve as a probe of the explosion mechanism, but also complicate the association of older neutron stars with their birth SNR. Accretion is the process by which material falls onto a central object (Frank It is clear that infalling material would not emit radiation unless accretion processes transform kinetic energy into radiation. Grav ity is the attractive force that pulls material inward but in practice, the process is limited by angular momentum transfer and interactions within the infalling material, which is where the energy is reprocessed into elec tromagnetic emission. This also makes it one of the very few ways that black holes manifest themselves. It is worth mentioning that accretion is not limited to the accretion of matter onto neutron stars and black holes. Accretion processes are also responsible for the formation of galaxies, stars, In the context of compact objects, accretion is important because it is one of the most ecient processes of converting rest mass energy to electromagnetic energy. Eciency is usually measured in terms of an eciency parameter  dened as the fraction of rest mass energy released [see Equation (2.1)]. A comparison between dierent mechanisms can be made. The eciency of chemical reactions such as burning of coal is 108 %, that of nuclear fusion, specically 4H  He (a typical stellar process), is 0.7 % whereas a typical value for accretion is 10 %. Compact objects that are actively accreting material are luminous elec tromagnetic sources. The radiation originates from an accretion disk or, for neutron stars only, from interactions on the surface. The most com mon characteristics of accretion are X-ray emission and variability on short timescales. The shortest timescale is approximately determined by the light crossing time, i.e. the size of the object divided by the speed of light. Accretion could occur in dierent types of environments. For young compact objects, the accreted material is most likely from the SN ejecta. This is called fallback accretion and could be occurring continuously from the SN explosion moment until thousands of years later (Rees, 1988; Phin ney, 1989; Evans and Kochanek, 1989). For older objects, a more likely source of material is a binary companion that evolves into a stellar evolu tion stage where it expands. This expansion could cause the outer parts to be more strongly attracted by the binary compact companion. A result of this is the expanding star starts losing material, which is accreted by the compact object. The accretion process is fundamentally the same in both cases even though the situations are dierent. The term pulsar was originally coined to describe a mysterious object that was observed to emit radio pulses at a regular interval of 1.33 s (Hewish et al., 1968). This is a result of the combination of the strong magnetic elds with the short rotational periods. The emission is observed to pulsate because the radiation is beamed along the axis of the magnetic dipole. This means that emission is observable from Earth only when the beams sweep our line of sight. A consequence of this is that many neutron stars should have beams of radio emission that are not observable from Earth, but an other possibility is also that not all neutron stars are radio pulsars. It was later discovered that the pulsating emission can be observed in virtually all wavelengths for some objects. A notable example is the neutron star that resides in the Crab Nebula (Buhler and Blandford, 2014), which has a It is common to assume that the observed bolometric luminosity (L) of a pulsar is equivalent to the decrease in rotational energy ( E), often referred to as spin-down luminosity. This is very powerful and connects the observed luminosity to the physical properties of the pulsar. If B is taken to be constant and the pulsar is modeled as a rotating magnetic dipole in Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae Figure 3.4. The colormap represents the pulsar luminosity modeled by Equation (3.2) as a function of B and P . The black points are Galactic pulsars (Manchester et al., 2005) and the large white diamond is the Crab Pulsar. The red points clus tered at low periods are inferred from SLSNe (Nicholl et al., 2017), whereas the two brown triangles at high magnetic elds are for Type Ic-BL SNe (Wang et al., 2017). The parameters for the last two classes of extreme SNe are highly model-dependent and much more uncertain. The hollow squares show the birth parameters for which light curves are shown in Figure 3.5. 32101log(P)(s)810121416log(B)(G)2025303540455055log(L)(ergs1) 3.6. Compact Remnants Figure 3.5. Luminosity as a function of age for dierent pulsar birth parameters, given by the legend. The birth parameters of these pulsars are also shown in Figure 3.4. vacuum (Gunn and Ostriker, 1969; Shapiro and Teukolsky, 1983), then where B is the equatorial surface magnetic eld strength, R the neutron star radius, and P the rotation period. The sensitive dependence on P and B, and the relatively large range of possible values implies that pulsars can have a very wide range of luminosities. This is shown in Figure 3.4 along with the inferred parameters of known pulsars. In this framework, the temporal evolution is completely known since all emitted energy is assumed to be converted from rotational energy. By equating the luminosity with the rotational energy loss, the time-dependent 101100101102t(years)103510371039104110431045Lbol(ergs1)P0=1ms,1.01014GP0=1ms,1.01013GP0=1ms,1.01012GP0=1ms,1.01011GP0=10ms,1.01015GP0=10ms,1.01014GP0=10ms,1.01013GP0=10ms,1.01012G 36 Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae where P0 is the initial period, t the age, and where P is the period derivative and M the neutron star mass.1 A sample of light curves for luminous and rapidly evolving pulsars is shown in Fig ure 3.5. The parameters for this set of pulsars are also shown in Figure 3.4. Notably, this shows that the set only spans a small fraction of the entire pulsar parameter space, highlighting the diversity among pulsars. A some what intuitive interpretation for the light curves is that B determines how fast energy is tapped from the reservoir, whereas P sets the total amount of energy available. It is also worth noting that pulsars with the same B have similar luminosities for t (cid:29) t(cid:48). In addition to the wide range of luminosi ties, it also visualizes the large range of timescales (t(cid:48)) for dierent pulsar Finally, it is worth pointing out that pulsars can increase their spin rate if they acquire angular momentum from an external source. The fastest spinning pulsars are the millisecond pulsars (MSPs) with periods less than approximately 10 ms. The prevailing explanation for their high spins is that they are spun-up (recycled) by accretion from binary companion stars (Alpar et al., 1982; Radhakrishnan and Srinivasan, 1982). The accreted material could then bury the magnetic eld, which allows the pulsars to keep their high spin. When the binary companion has died, only the millisecond 3.6.4 Thermal Surface Emission All neutron stars are also expected to emit thermal emission from the sur face. The rst cooling stage of neutron stars is dominated by neutrino emis sion from the core. This means that the core temperature evolves almost independently of the crust and that the core cools faster than the crust. The neutron star then enters a stage of thermal crust relaxation when the cooling wave from the core reaches the surface. This happens on a timescale of a few years when the age of the neutron star is 10100 years. The sur face temperature during these early stages is expected to be on the order of millions of Kelvin. Observations of thermal relaxation would provide clues to the physics of the interior of neutron stars (Gnedin et al., 2001; Shternin and Yakovlev, 2008; Page et al., 2009). 1There is a typographical error in Equation (6) of Paper I. P should be P0 in that equation, such that it matches Equation (3.4) above. One class of neutron stars, called central compact objects (CCOs), are observed to only emit thermal radiation, show no signs of pulsar activity, and are associated with SNRs. Spin-down rates of three CCOs have been measured to be low, which implies low external magnetic dipole elds of ap proximately < 1011 G (Halpern and Gotthelf, 2010; Gotthelf et al., 2013). This would be approximately an order of magnitude weaker than for most of the observed pulsars (Manchester et al., 2005; Luo et al., 2015). Some CCOs display anisotropic surface temperatures (Halpern and Gotthelf, 2010; Got thelf et al., 2013; Bogdanov, 2014; Rea et al., 2016). A possible explanation for temperature anisotropies is that a stronger magnetic eld that aects the thermal properties is trapped inside the neutron star by fallback accre tion in the past (Ho, 2011; Bernal et al., 2013; Perna et al., 2013; Bogdanov, Most of stellar evolution is typically assumed to be an approximately spher ical process. However, it is immediately clear from observations of SNRs that they are clearly asymmetric (Hwang et al., 2004; Grefenstette et al., 2017; Larsson et al., 2016; Abellan et al., 2017). In addition to the asym metric morphology, the mixing of materials is also important. Mixing refers to the breaking of the stratied radial structure (see Figure 3.2) and blend ing of regions of dierent compositions. The mixing is important for the explosive nucleosynthesis, for the emission from subsequent phases, and as an important property of the explosion mechanism. The small-scale (micro scopic) mixing is also important for the formation of dust and molecules in the ejecta. The spatial distributions of the heavy metals are sensitive probes of the explosion mechanism because they are synthesized in the innermost regions close to the explosion engine. Exactly how and when the spherical symmetry is broken is an area of active research. Hydrodynamic instabilities in neutrino-driven SN simula tions are capable of producing asymmetries that are qualitatively similar to observed SNRs (Hammer et al., 2010; Janka, 2017; Wongwathanarat et al., 2017; Gabler et al., 2021). These asymmetries can develop from almost spherical progenitor models, but it is also possible that the instabilities de veloped during the explosion are seeded by violent convection in the last stages of the evolution of the progenitors (Couch et al., 2015; Muller et al., 2017; Yadav et al., 2020; Yoshida et al., 2021). The clear breaking of all spatial symmetries on many length scales from the very rst moments of explosion can be clearly seen in Figure 1.2. The ra dial convective instabilities, i.e. Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities, on large scales Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae Image of SN 1987A taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in 2017. The triple-ring structure consists of material expelled by the progenitor before the explosion and the rings are now shining brightly as a result of interactions with the SN ejecta. Most of the ejecta by mass is located in the central white bright spot. The two very bright points that are almost co-axial with the triple-ring nebula are just two stars unrelated to SN 1987A and happen to be projected close to SN 1987A. NASA, ESA, and R. Kirshner (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation) and P. Challis (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics) eectively transport ejecta from deep within the core through the outer hy drogen and helium layers resulting in strong mixing and breaking of the stratication developed throughout stellar evolution (Figure 3.2). Typical velocities for the bulk of the iron-group elements are in the range 1000 2000 km s1. However, observations have shown that a smaller fraction is accelerated to signicantly higher velocities (Arnett et al., 1989; Grefen stette et al., 2017). Velocities up to 4500 km s1 for several 103 M(cid:12) of 56Ni and other iron-peak elements have also been found in simulations (Hammer SN 1987A (Figure 3.6) was rst detected on 1987 February 23 (Kunkel et al., 1987) and has been thoroughly studied ever since (for reviews, see Arnett et al., 1989; McCray, 1993; McCray and Fransson, 2016). What makes SN 1987A unique is that it is located in the Large Magellanic Cloud, which makes it the closest observed SN since Keplers SN in 1604 (Kepler, 1606). Consequently, SN 1987A is the only SN that allows astronomers to perform detailed observations at late times and also allows us to detect much fainter components that are otherwise too weak to be observed. For example, it has been possible to spatially resolve the evolution of SN 1987A (e.g. Wang et al., 2002; Larsson et al., 2016, 2019; Abellan et al., 2017; Cigan et al., 2019) and it is clear that the outer layers are powered by CSM interactions rather than radioactive decay (Larsson et al., 2011). A mosaic of this evolution is shown in Figure 3.7. Additionally, it is the only CCSN where the early radioactive emission has been observed in X-rays and gamma-rays (e.g. Dotani et al., 1987; Sun yaev et al., 1987; Matz et al., 1988), which is used for the analysis in Pa per III. One of the important implications of these observations is that the radioactive material must have been mixed from the core where they are formed to the outer layers (e.g. Pinto and Woosley, 1988). Large amounts of dust have been detected in the ejecta (Matsuura et al., 2011; Indebetouw et al., 2014; Matsuura et al., 2015; Cigan et al., 2019), which implies that CCSNe could be important dust factories. Another consequence of the dust is that our view of the innermost regions is partly obscured in UVOIR. This is very important for our conclusions in Paper I. Three rings that form an hourglass-like shape can be seen around SN 1987A, sometimes called the triple-ring nebula (Figure 3.6). The rings are created by material expelled before the SN explosion and constitute part of the CSM. The vast majority of the material expelled by the SN remains inside the smallest inner ring. The central ring is the brightest at all wave lengths and is currently violently interacting with the ejecta. It is assumed to mark the equator of the progenitor and is often called the equatorial ring. The two outer rings are much fainter and are seen in some optical images. There are also two very bright stars that are close to SN 1987A (in sky projections) that are unrelated to SN 1987A. These stars are sometimes referred to as Stars 2 and 3, where Star 1 would be Sanduleak -69 202 (Walborn et al., 1987). Unintuitively, Star 3 is the one closer than Star 2, possibly because Star 2 was more easily distinguishable in early images. The progenitor was identied as Sanduleak -69 202, which was a BSG (West et al., 1987; White and Malin, 1987; Kirshner et al., 1987; Walborn et al., 1987). Sanduleak -69 202 was classied as B3 Ia with a tempera ture of 15,750 K, a radius of 40 R(cid:12), and a luminosity just above 100,000 L(cid:12) (Walborn et al., 1987; Trundle et al., 2007; Smartt, 2009). The identication of Sanduleak -69 202 as the progenitor and that it was a BSG were impor tant to our description of SNe. An important note is that it is still unclear how a star could evolve and undergo core collapse with the observed prop Chapter 3. Core-collapse Supernovae Figure 3.7. Mosaic showing the evolution of SN 1987A from 1994 to 2016. The images are optical images from the Hubble Space Telescope. The ring is often called the equatorial ring and is clearly structured on small scales. The ring increases in brightness because the ejecta from the explosion (the clearly evolving central point) slowly collide more violently with the ring, which heats it and makes it brighten. erties of Sanduleak -69 202. There are also additional constraints, such as the existence of the triple-ring nebula and its composition. One hypothesis is that SN 1987A is the result of a binary merger 20,000 years before the explosion (Blondin and Lundqvist, 1993; Morris and Podsiadlowski, 2007, 2009; Menon and Heger, 2017; Menon et al., 2019) or a rapidly rotating progenitor (Chita et al., 2008). Another major milestone associated with SN 1987A was the detection of the prompt neutrino burst, which signaled the formation of a compact object (Hirata et al., 1987; Bratton et al., 1988; Burrows, 1988). This is important because it is a very rm prediction that underpins all of CCSN theory. This was also the rst detection of astrophysical neutrinos and marked the birth of multi-messenger astronomy (if solar neutrinos are excluded). However, no electromagnetic signal from the compact object has been detected and observations are able to put relatively strong constraints on the remaining possibilities. This is the topic of Paper I. This chapter is an overview of key properties of dierent kinds of astronom ical observatories. It is aimed toward physicists not familiar with observa tional astronomy. Paper I relies on observations spanning practically the entire spectrum. Papers II and III are limited to X-ray and gamma-rays. Papers IV and V exclusively use X-ray data and are to large extents exer cises in observational X-ray astronomy. I cover the entire electromagnetic spectrum in this chapter, except for X-rays. This is presented separately and in greater detail in the next chapter because of the focus on X-rays of It is important to make a distinction between the telescope and the in strument. The instrument refers to the device that detects the photons collected by the telescopes. Many telescopes are equipped with several in struments with very dierent capabilities. For ground-based telescopes (and in exceptional cases also space-based), the instruments can be upgraded or replaced, which could signicantly improve the scientic capabilities of the same telescope. To avoid confusion, some facilities are referred to as obser vatories (particularly the space-based) and can have several telescopes. There are several dierent kinds of astronomical measurements. The most intuitive is imaging, which just means taking a picture of a part of the sky. Of great scientic importance are measurements of spectra. In general, the spectra of dierent astronomical objects carry much more information than the corresponding images. A problem with obtaining spectra is that it is observationally and technically more challenging. Additionally, photons are also characterized by polarization. Polarimetric information is some times used to infer properties about special physical processes that give rise to polarized emission. The aforementioned properties can also be combined, such as integral eld spectroscopy (imaging and spectroscopy) or spectropo larimetry (spectroscopy and polarimetry). Another avenue of analyzing astronomical objects is by observing how it varies over time. This includes SNe that are transients, meaning that they appear and then disappear. But there are also numerous objects in space that are variable, which means that they are persistent sources that have some properties that change as a function of time. This could, for example, be a change in the accretion rate onto a compact object or the change in observed brightness of a star when an orbiting planet passes in front of it. 4.1 General Properties of Observations Many general properties of telescopes are similar throughout the electro magnetic spectrum. The most obvious being the size of the telescope or the eective area. Sometimes eciency is mentioned, which refers to the prob ability that an incoming photon is detected. To rst order, the eciency is the factor that converts the telescope area to the eective area. Another important characteristic is the angular resolution of a telescope. This is roughly the minimum angular separation at which two individual objects can be distinguished. It is worth emphasizing that the resolution is rarely set by the pixel size and that it has nothing to do with the total number of pixels, which is what is commonly used as resolution measures A concept that is closely related to the angular resolution is the point spread function (PSF, or point response). This is how a point source of emis sion would appear as observed by the telescope. It is useful because many sources at astronomical distances can be approximated as point sources. The shapes of PSFs are often similar to Gaussians or the superposition of What determines the angular resolution is in some cases technical di culties related to how the photons are measured. However, a fundamental limit is set by diraction, called the diraction limit. Classically, this is the interference that arises when waves encounter an obstacle. The diraction limit is proportional to the wavelength over the linear size of the object. In the context of telescopes, the size is the telescope. This means that larger telescopes oer sharper images while also collecting more photons. In addition to the angular resolution, it is also common to refer to the spectral and temporal resolution of an instrument, if applicable. Spectral resolution refers to the accuracy of the measurement of the photon energies and temporal resolution is the accuracy of the photon arrival time mea surement. Spectral resolution is typically given by the smallest measurable  4.1. General Properties of Observations energy dierence E over the photon energy E, or by resolving power, which is the inverse of spectral resolution. Other properties of astronomical measurements are the exposure and eld of view. These are completely analogous to those of everyday pho tography. Typical astronomical exposures range from hundreds of seconds to weeks. Fields of view also vary over many orders of magnitude. The smallest pencil-beam observations cover less than 1 arcsec2 (a grain of sand at a distance of 100 m) to all-sky monitors that cover 2 sr (half the sky). All observations also suer from background. This is typically a com bination of the noise from the instrument and the emission from other as trophysical sources. A standard step in almost every data reduction is to subtract the background, often by sampling the background from a nearby representative region free of source emission. A complicated measurement that is an important characteristic of every instrument is its sensitivity. This is essentially the minimum brightness that can be detected in a given observation. it is a non-trivial combination of the resolutions, eective area, eciency, exposure, background levels, source properties, and where in the eld of The atmosphere also aects observations by absorbing and distorting the incoming light. The most familiar atmospheric window where photons are transmitted is the optical window, which peaks around what humans can see. It extends from photon wavelengths of around 300 nm to 2.5 m. The majority of all observatories operate in this range. The second big atmospheric window is in radio to sub-mm from around 30 m to 0.3 mm (1 THz). This is why practically all of the big radio dishes are ground based. There are several narrower windows in the M-band at 5 m, the N-band between 8 to 13 m and the Q-band between 17 and 20 m. These are much less used, partly because the thermal blackbody emission of the atmosphere (around typical temperatures) peaks in this range. The remain ing wavebands are almost exclusively observed from space, or in rare cases high-altitude airborne or balloon-borne instruments. Another eect of the atmosphere is that it blurs the view of the skies at angular resolutions below approximately 1 arcsec. This is often called atmospheric seeing and is an eect of the atmosphere being dynamic and non-homogeneous, which distorts the light through refraction. This is most problematic for the latest and upcoming generations of ground-based optical and NIR telescopes. To correct for atmospheric seeing, a technique called adaptive optics has been developed. This basically means that the atmo spheric distortions are measured and small live mechanical adjustments are made to the shape of the mirrors to compensate for the distortions at ad justment frequencies on the order of 1 kHz. One method of measuring the atmospheric distortions is to project a guide star using a laser. Because of the absorption and distortion, it is common to construct observatories at high altitudes. Humidity is also a key parameter when choosing sites because water vapor limits observations in certain bands. Radio and (sub-)mm observations reveal objects that produce synchrotron emission and dust emission. Examples of synchrotron sources are shocks in SNRs and jets launched by accretion onto compact objects. The cold dust emission peaks toward the shorter wavelengths and is ubiquitous in all galaxies. Other notable observables are the spin-flip of hydrogen at 21 cm, the cosmic microwave background around 1 mm, and several molecular ro tational transitions toward shorter wavelengths. Radio telescopes use large dishes that are relatively easy to construct because the required precision of the dish only needs to be smaller than the wavelength. This means that the collecting area of radio and (sub-)mm tele scopes are very large, with single dishes up to 500 m in diameter. However, the long wavelengths also mean that the energy carried by each photon is very low, and very large areas are required to reach competitive sensitivities. It is also very uncommon for astrophysical objects to have a large fraction of the total energy output at wavelengths longer than a few millimeters. Long wavelengths also mean that the diraction limit is very high, even for the largest telescopes. A method of improving the angular resolution is to measure incoming wavefronts using several dishes and then reconstructing the complete waveforms, a method called aperture synthesis or interferom etry (Ryle and Hewish, 1960). The result is that the diraction limit can be reduced to the diraction limit of an instrument with a size equivalent to the longest separation between two dishes. The separations between the dishes are called baselines. Even though the diraction limit is equal to that of the array as a whole, the arrays are typically sparse with a few dishes spread out over a much larger area. This means that there eectively are holes in the synthesized aperture, from which the information has to be reconstructed in the data processing. Interferometry has been employed in radio for several decades and is currently being pioneered in NIR. However, combining the data from dif ferent telescopes at higher frequencies than around 1 THz is much more challenging and is still in its infancy. Two notable instruments in the radio and (sub-)mm range are Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA, Thompson et al. 1980; Perley et al. 2011) and the Atacama Large Millime ter/submillimeter Array (ALMA, Wootten and Thompson 2009). FIR and MIR cover emission from cool material (approximately below stan dard temperature), and atomic and molecular lines, a notable example is the H2O ground state line at 179 m. This wavelength range is dicult to observe because the relatively long wavelengths require large telescopes in order to achieve angular resolutions comparable to many other wave bands. This is similar to radio, but the dierence is that FIR and MIR are absorbed by the atmosphere, which means that observatories must be placed in orbit. Additionally, the detectors need to be cooled to reduce the thermal noise from the detector itself. There are a small number of instruments that operate from airplanes to avoid most of the atmosphere, or in the narrow bands in the MIR where ground-based observations are possible. However, the thermal emission from the atmosphere still results in extremely high background levels that require special observing modes. The Herschel Space Observatory (Pilbratt et al., 2010) was a recent large class FIR mission that was decommissioned in 2013 and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST ; Gardner et al. 2006) is an upcoming MIR (and NIR) observatory slated for launch on 2021 October 31. Out of all wavebands, the UVOIR range is by far the most mature (and oldest, e.g. Copernicus, 1543; Brahe, 1573; Galilei, 1632). It includes the thermal emission of warm material (approximately 300 K to 1 MK) and many well-observed atomic transitions. This includes emission from stars, SNe, SNRs, and accretion onto compact objects. The images that are taken in UVOIR are in principle similar to every day photography in many ways. However, one important dierence is that astronomical UVOIR observations are almost exclusively in one lter. A lter is simply something that is placed in the optical path and only lets through light within a certain wavelength range. This is because UVOIR CCDs (Boyle and Smith, 1970) are not inherently color sensitive. The rea son that common CCDs capture color is because there are sets of three dierent CCDs with lters corresponding to red, green, and blue. Another way to view it is that every color picture taken by an everyday camera is, in fact, three simultaneous pictures taken in red, green, and blue lters, which combined results in one color image. This is similar to what is done in astronomy, the dierence being that astronomical observations are not limited to three lters in the optical part of the spectrum. In contrast, it is common to simply have one R-band (red) image, which is then visualized Spectroscopy is sometimes performed using slits. When the incoming light passes through the narrow opening, diraction splits the light into dierent colors, which are then registered using CCDs. More modern in struments are now capable of performing integral eld spectroscopy where a spectrum is extracted from every pixel in the image. What happens under the hood in these instruments is basically the same. The dierence is simply that the light that would have landed on one traditional imaging pixel is redirected onto a grating (or equivalent) such that the diracted spectrum can be recorded by a CCD. Imaging spectroscopy often comes at the cost of another quality, such as reduced eld of view or lower angular resolu tion. Two examples of such integral eld units (IFUs) are the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE, Bacon et al. 2010) and the Spectrograph for INtegral Field Observations in the Near Infrared (SINFONI, Eisenhauer et al. 2003; Bonnet et al. 2004) at the Very Large Telescope (VLT). Cosmic rays and other high-energy particles also trigger CCDs. To miti gate the eects of particles in observations, it is common to combine several individual exposures into a nal image. The particle interactions will then clearly show up as bright points or streaks in one of the exposures and can easily be removed when compared to the other images. In addition to removing cosmic rays, it is possible to shift the pointing of the telescope between each exposure by what corresponds to fractions of a pixel to a few pixels. This procedure is called dithering. The process results in a sam pling of dierent physical pixels that could have varying eciency, lls in gaps between dierent CCD chips, and possibly also improves the sampling of the PSF. For example, this is performed for all Hubble Space Telescope (HST ) observations in standard operation modes. Gamma-ray astronomy is closely related to X-ray astronomy. Examples of gamma-ray phenomena are jets that are aligned with our line of sight, young magnetars, and emission originating from the decay of radioactive elements A major dierence for gamma-ray astronomy is that there is no focusing optics, but collimators and coded masks are both used. At these photon energies, the detection techniques are partly overlapping with the detection techniques of charged particles. Gamma-ray detectors generally have low angular resolution and a high background level compared to other detectors.  4.3. Multi-messenger Astronomy One method of detecting gamma-rays is to let gamma photons interact with material, form an electron-positron pair, and then measure the shower of secondary particles that are created. From the direction of the secondary shower, it is possible to reconstruct the incident direction and photon energy. This is the technology used by the Large Area Telescope (LAT, Atwood et al. 2009) on board the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope (Fermi ). There are also semiconductor detectors that detect the electrons and positive ions that are produced when a high-energy photon passes through the material. An example is the high-purity germanium detectors that con stitute the SPectrometer onboard INTEGRAL (SPI, Vedrenne et al. 2003; Roques et al. 2003) on board the INTErnational Gamma-Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL, Winkler et al. 2003). Another type of detector is the scintillator, which is a material that emits flashes of light when excited by high-energy radiation. This is used to detect gamma-ray bursts by the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM, Meegan et al. 2009) on board Fermi. Lastly, for very-high-energy gamma-rays, there are ground-based tele scopes that observe the light emitted by the secondary particle shower in duced by the primary gamma-ray. The secondary particles travel at veloci ties higher than the speed of light in air, which results in so-called Cherenkov radiation. This is similar to sonic booms for acoustic waves. The High En ergy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S., Hinton and the HESS Collaboration 2004) is an example of such a telescope. 4.3 Multi-messenger Astronomy It is also important to mention that not all astronomical observations are measurements of electromagnetic radiation. Several astronomical objects also accelerate charged particles to very high energies, rst detected by Hess (1912). For historical reasons, these particles are called cosmic rays even though they are particles and not radiation. Today, several large facilities are able to detect these energetic particles of astrophysical origins. Neutrinos are another type of particle that is generated by astrophysical processes. They are not charged and a characteristic trait is that they are very weakly interacting. Because of the dierent physics involved in both the origin and detection of neutrinos, they are considered a separate channel from cosmic rays. Neutrino detectors are typically large-volume water (e.g. Super-Kamiokande; Fukuda et al. 2003) or ice (e.g. IceCube; IceCube Collaboration et al. 2006) detectors. A fundamentally dierent method of astronomical observations is grav itational waves. They are disturbances in spacetime generated by the ac celeration of masses. Gravitational waves were rst indirectly inferred in a binary neutron star system (Hulse and Taylor, 1975; Taylor and Weis berg, 1989), and recently directly detected from a binary black hole merger by the LIGO and Virgo collaboration (Abbott et al., 2016). Gravitational waves and mass are in many aspects the gravitational equivalent of electro magnetic waves (photons) and charge. The main dierence being that the gravitational eects are much weaker, which is why only the most massive objects under extreme acceleration generate detectable gravitational waves. X-rays are eectively absorbed by the atmosphere and are only observed from space, or high-altitude balloons and rockets. It is a relatively young eld and was initiated by the rst X-ray detection of an extrasolar source by Giacconi et al. (1962). X-rays primarily originate as thermal emission from hot gas (above 1 MK) and as non-thermal emission from relativistic Since most of the attached papers mainly rely on X-ray data, a more detailed description of X-ray astronomy is provided in this chapter. The purpose is to introduce concepts to facilitate understanding of the analyses performed in the attached papers, not necessarily serving as an independent introduction to X-ray astronomy. X-ray telescopes are very dierent from telescopes at lower energies. First, there is no primary mirror that is analogous to the primary of optical tele scopes. Instead, X-ray optics relies on grazing incidence mirrors. The con cept is that the incoming photons reflect against X-ray mirrors at very small angles, relative to the surface, toward a focus. This setup requires the mirrors to be nearly aligned with the incoming X-ray, resulting in a small eective area for each individual mirror, but also allows for multiple mir rors to be nested. This technology is used for several X-ray telescopes, such as the Chandra X-Ray Observatory (CXO, Weisskopf et al. 2000, 2002), NuSTAR (Harrison et al., 2013; Madsen et al., 2015), and XMM-Newton The two major X-ray observatories are Chandra and XMM-Newton. Both telescopes have elds of view (FoVs) of approximately 0.2 square de grees. This is similar to the solid angle subtended by the full Moon, or equivalently, 1/200,000 of the entire sky. The wide-eld all-sky survey in struments with focusing optics have FoVs of around 1 square degree, such as ROSAT (Trumper, 1983; Briel et al., 1994) and eROSITA (Predehl et al., The angular resolution of X-ray telescopes varies. Chandra oers the highest resolution of 0.7 arcsec, measured by the full width at half max imum (FWHM) of the PSF. The corresponding values are 6 arcsec for XMM-Newton and 18 arcsec for NuSTAR. The half-power diameter (HPD) is sometimes also mentioned in this context. In conjunction with the FWHM, the HPD provides a handle on how broad the wings of the PSF are. It is often the case that two dierent physical limitations determine the width of the core and the width of the wings of the PSF. The details of the PSF are further complicated by a fairly signicant dependence on the o-axis angle for most telescopes. The PSF is also slightly dependent on energy, but this dependence is typically fairly weak. The o-axis eects are only important when observing o-axis sources or resolved targets that extend beyond the Another dening property of X-ray telescopes is the eective area. This is on the order of 1001000 cm2 for most telescopes. quantity is often a strongly varying function of energy. pointing out that there might be discrete steps in the eective area at certain energies, often associated with atomic transition energies of the material in the telescope. The calibration around these sharp edges could be less reliable. In general, the telescopes have a higher eective area toward lower energies. Additionally, more photons are produced at lower energies by most astrophysical sources, unless the spectrum is very hard. Therefore, the vast majority of observed X-ray spectra show higher quality at lower energies. Aside from the energy dependence, the eective area also depends on the o-axis angle, an eect called vignetting. This is a relatively smooth eect and only aects o-axis observations. Dithering is also be performed in X-ray, similarly to UVOIR observa tions. The telescopes perform a continuous wobble during exposures, which is automatically corrected for in the data reduction. This implies that im ages of astronomical sources wobble on the detector, an eect that can be used to verify the origin of sources (Bauer et al., 2017). Alternative technologies to optics using grazing mirrors are coded mask apertures and collimators. Collimators are simply narrowing the eld of view to the detectors and are eectively just photon buckets. This results in no imaging capabilities. Coded masks rely on masking the detector in such a way that it is possible to reconstruct the direction of the photon to some extent and thus oers low-resolution imaging. An advantage is that the FoV and eective areas are more scalable for telescopes using these The primary detection technology used for X-rays is CCDs, but they are quite dierent from UVOIR CCDs. X-ray CCDs are typically sensitive to photon energy with a spectral resolution of around 10 %. This means that almost all X-ray images have an associated spectrum with each pixel. The number of photons is often in the range of 10010,000 and it is common to quote the total number of photons in an observation. Another dierence is that the exposures are much shorter and many ex posures are combined to the total exposure time of an observation. However, some CCDs use a triggered readout where the pixel is read each time a pho ton is registered. The individual exposure times are often called frame times and vary from milliseconds to a few seconds. The cost of each readout is that the detector is not registering new events during this time. This down time is often referred to as readout time or deadtime. The total exposure time of most X-ray observations ranges from 10100 ks. A consequence of how X-ray CCDs are operated is that the raw data of each observation is a list of photons, or events. There are three key properties associated with each event: time, position, and energy. This is in contrast with ordinary CCD exposures, which only produce images. Images are technically 2D histograms of position integrated over time with no energy information. For X-ray observations, it is fruitful to think of the raw data as an event list, which is a table of all incoming photons and their It is then from this list that images, spectra, and Many of the X-ray observatories have several instruments and multiple instruments could be operated simultaneously for each observation. Each instrument can also have many modes, which are selected by the PI when planning the observation. The specic set-up depends on the capabilities of the observatory and what science goals are trying to be achieved. The main dierence between observing modes is often related to the brightness of the source and what temporal resolution is required for the science goals. It is also worth pointing out that the detector for every instrument often consists of several CCDs (but entire detectors are often referred to as CCDs). The implication for observers is that the mosaic of CCDs results in chip gaps in the detector. Furthermore, there are often slight variations between the individual CCDs. It is often recommended to only use data from the CCD on which the science target is located. For example, the background levels could vary slightly between the CCDs. In this case, the background should be sampled from the same CCD as the source, even if this CCD only constitutes a small fraction of the FoV. Spectral information is not only provided by CCDs. Higher-resolution spectroscopy in X-rays can be performed using either reflection or trans mission gratings. The idea is simply to insert a grating that diracts the incoming light in the optical path that is then read out by a CCD. The resolving powers of gratings are on the order of several hundred. The draw back of gratings is that they lower the eective area. Both XMM-Newton and Chandra are equipped with grating spectrometers. Another detector type for high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy is mi crocalorimeters, which are used as detectors instead of CCDs. The concept is that an incident X-ray hits a pixel and deposits the energy into heat. This temperature increase can then be accurately measured and gives spec tral resolutions comparable to that of the gratings. X-ray microcalorimeters have been flown on both Suzaku (Mitsuda et al., 2007) and Hitomi (ASTRO H, Takahashi et al. 2016), but were only operational for a very short time due to accidents. The X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission (XRISM, formerly XARM and ASTRO-H2, Tashiro et al. 2018) is the replacement mission of Hitomi and will be equipped with an X-ray microcalorimeter. Data reduction is the process of converting raw data to science products. Standard analyses of a point source on-axis can in many cases perform an almost default reduction, but the process can sometimes be much more com plicated. There are a number of decisions that need to be made; some of the most important and common are described below. In general, the purpose is to optimize the quality of the products with respect to the science goals. The reduction itself is performed using custom software that is provided by The rst step is to apply the latest calibration to the raw data. The data from X-ray archives are at a low level, which allows future, more accurate calibrations to be applied at the time of analysis. A lter based on the pattern of each event is also applied. Pattern refers to the pixels hit by each photon. Every photon could trigger one or several pixels, and this spatial distribution is referred to as a pattern. The patterns are essentially small pixel islands (often 3  3 or 5  5 pixels) and the shapes of these patterns contain information about the event. The cleanest subset is usually those where a photon only hit one pixel, but smaller clusters of triggered pixels are often accepted. Beyond a certain threshold, events are rejected and are likely dominated by particle interactions or fluorescence. After the initial calibrations, most observations require a time lter to exclude periods of high background. This type of background flaring is very characteristic and dominated by high-energy protons from the Sun. The importance of this phenomenon depends on the orbit and whether or not it is inside the protective magnetosphere of the Earth. For example, Chandra is placed in an elliptical orbit with an eccentricity of 0.74 that brings it to more than one-third of the distance to the Moon. The advantage of such an orbit is that the telescope is eclipsed by the Earth for a much shorter fraction of the total time and that longer continuous observations are possible. This comes at the cost of exposure lost to proton flares. It has been found that 3040 % of the exposure time of the pn instrument on board XMM-Newton is lost to flares (Carter and Read, 2007). Most observations require a source and a background region to be de ned. The most common approach is to assume the background region to be representative of the background in the source region and then subtracted at some stage of the analysis. It is also important to note what fraction of all photons of a point source that is expected within the source region. This fraction is sometimes referred to as encircled energy and only applies Filters can also be applied to restrict the energy range used for the If light curves are produced or fluxes estimated directly from the data, a number of instrumental corrections need to be applied. This converts the observed photon count rate to a flux in physical units. A more careful conversion requires a model for the spectrum and is performed in the spectral analysis. This is are more complicated and is described in Section If the accuracy of the timestamps is important, a barycentric correction needs to be applied (Eastman et al., 2010). This corrects for the accelerating motion of the telescope. It shifts the time of arrival of all photons to the time at which they would have been observed at the Solar System center of mass. This level of accuracy is practically only needed for analyses of pulsars. It is worth pointing out that it is notoriously easy for unexpected problems to corrupt the data for this type of high-resolution timing analysis. There are a number of instrumental aspects that the observer needs to be aware of. It is well-established that the calibration of X-ray instru ments are accurate to 510 % (Plucinsky et al., 2008, 2017; Ishida et al., 2011; Tsujimoto et al., 2011; Kettula et al., 2013; Read et al., 2014; Mad sen et al., 2017). Both the absolute magnitude and the spectral shapes are uncertain. Most analyses do not suer signicantly from this, either due to a low number of photons or because only one instrument is used. Instru ments on board the same observatory tend to be better cross-calibrated, but these uncertainties should be kept in mind when analyzing X-ray data. Instrumental calibrations tend to improve over time, but sometimes the in strumental properties also evolve as the instruments age. It is useful to be aware of this, as it has caused confusion in the past. There are also other types of instrumental artifacts or observational limitations. These are obviously non-astronomical in all but very few cases. An example is a temporary failure of the aspect reconstruction, where all sources shift by an arbitrary amount for a short time. This is not obvious in the time-integrated image if the failure duration is very short relative to the entire observation. Sometimes a pixel (or a cluster of pixels) flares and continuously triggers. This is not always ltered by the data reduction and will leave an artifact in the nal product. Another possible problem is leak age from radioactive sources that are installed on board as absolute energy calibrators, which could introduce spectral lines. Finally, bright sources outside the eld of view can leak into the frame, causing characteristic arcs of emission. All of these problems can be identied by dierent procedures, for example, by comparing with the known PSF shape, inspecting the inte grated and time-resolved images, and monitoring the suspect source relative to other sources in the FoV. The issues mentioned above are not exhaustive and this particular aspect of the data analysis often relies on the experience This section describes parts of the data preparation related to the spectra and how spectral analyses usually are performed. The aim of the spectral analysis is to compare one or several models with the data and nd associ ated parameter values. A software package called XSPEC (Arnaud, 1996) is used for a majority of all X-ray spectral analyses. This facilitates the management of the dierent data les and includes most of the standard optimization and statistics functions. The response matrix le (RMF) and ancillary response le (ARF) are critical for the spectral analysis. The RMF describes the probability that an incoming photon is detected at a given energy as a function of true photon energy. This has the important implication that the true underlying photon distribution cannot be recovered exactly. The incoming photon spectrum undergoes a convolution by the instrument response, which is modeled by the RMF. This convolution is lossy in the sense that the original spectrum cannot be uniquely determined if only the convolved spectrum is known. The spectrum convolved by the instrument response is sometimes referred to as folded or forward-folded spectrum. The ARF is simpler and only con tains the eective area as a function of energy. This implies that it carries all corrections associated with normalizing to the physical area, such as the encircled energy and o-axis angle. A number of less important factors contribute to the RMF and ARF to varying degrees, for example, the tem perature of the instrument and the time since launch. It is worth pointing out that spectra often are presented in the instrument space, meaning that the spectra are folded by the instrument response. This means that many features, which are purely instrumental, are introduced into the spectrum. Typically, there are some steps or wiggles due to the varying eective area, and all folded spectra tend to show a decline toward higher energies due to the decreasing eective area. The most common method of creating a spectrum from the event list is to bin the events, creating an energy histogram of the photons. common to choose a binning of 25 photons per bin. This is to have a sucient number of photons to apply Gaussian statistics. However, if there are too few photons, it might be necessary to analyze the unbinned data (often implemented as binning to 1 photon per bin for technical reasons). In this case, the analysis needs to employ Poissonian statistics, often referred to as the C statistic in XSPEC (Cash, 1979). Admittedly, some aspects of the statistics are conventionally treated somewhat sloppily. However, this is rarely important because the scientic conclusions are typically not sensitive to eects on the magnitude of those introduced by the statistical simplications. This is also partly to facilitate the analysis, and partly to follow previous studies, allowing for comparisons. In light of this, it is worth stressing that marginal features should not be immediately trusted. Not only does one need to carefully evaluate their statistical signicance, but also beware of instrumental, observational, and modeling pitfalls. The XSPEC package contains a large number of spectral components, which are combined to create suitable models. It is common to use one or a few additive source components representing dierent physical emission In addition to these additive components, most models use one or two multiplicative absorption components. In this context, multiplica tive means that they are multiplicative functions of energy that need to modify an underlying additive component. These model the attenuation by the ISM in the Milky Way along the line of sight, and possibly absorp tion in the local environment of the source. XSPEC then computes the source spectrum from the combined model, folds it through the modeled instrument response (RMF and ARF), and compares it to the observed, background-subtracted source spectrum. The model is tted by iterating using the LevenbergMarquardt algorithm (Levenberg, 1944; Marquardt, 1963) to nd the best-t parameter values. Statistical uncertainties are obtained by varying the parameters until a threshold increase of the t statistic. The scientic analysis can then be performed based on the results In this chapter, I aim to provide less technical summaries of the attached papers. The idea is to bridge the gap between the introductory part of this thesis and the papers. The following summaries are, therefore, more conceptual and explanatory, while being less quantitative. The compact remnant that is expected to have been formed by SN 1987A has not yet been detected despite more than 30 years of searches. The for mation of a compact object is a critical prediction of CCSN theory and SN 1987A oers the best possibility for us to directly conrm this. Since it has not yet been detected, it is important to use the available observations to constrain the remaining possibilities. Of particular interest are the remain ing possibilities for a neutron star because this scenario is favored by most We used recent observations in millimeter, NIR, optical, UV, and X rays to achieve the most complete coverage possible. One of the major challenges was to model how the emission from a compact object could be reprocessed. This is important because it is likely that much of the original emission from a compact remnant would be absorbed. However, the energy must still escape the ejecta in some form. To model these interactions, we use the X-ray absorption model from Paper II as well as a much more uncertain dust model based on previous research. Chapter 6. Summary of the Attached Papers The complete physical model constrains accretion, pulsar wind activity, and thermal surface emission from a neutron star. The accretion limits are fairly constraining and rule out many of the theoretical predictions of fallback accretion. The limits on the magnetic eld strength and rotation period are more dicult to interpret because of the lack of accurate theoret ical predictions. We nd that certain dust properties are likely required just for the thermal surface emission to remain undetected, but this conclusion relies on a number of assumptions. This means that a neutron star remains a possibility, but the remaining parameter space is relatively small. A number of future facilities will provide interesting observations that have a chance of detecting a neutron star. Of particular interest are the next generation of ground-based optical and NIR telescopes that will have unprecedented angular resolutions and sensitivities, and future ALMA ob servations of the thermal dust emission. Finally, we simply note that a black hole is fully consistent with observations and that this scenario is, unfortunately, very dicult to verify observationally. This paper focuses on the X-ray absorption in young SNRs using 3D mod els from neutrino-driven SN explosion simulations. Young in this context is from 100 days to around 1000 years, but these numbers sensitively de pend on how much the ejecta interact with the environment. The aim was primarily to study the X-ray absorption but the models are valid to beyond 1 MeV. In contrast to the other papers, we use the SN simulations to model how much absorption we expect to the center of the remnants. Basically, this means that we use the prediction as a model rather than directly testing the accuracy of the model. The absorption to the center is of particular in terest because the compact remnant left by a CCSN explosion should reside relatively close to the center. One of the motivations for this study was that a more detailed model was required to model the X-ray optical depth to the center of SN 1987A for Paper I. We nd that the X-ray depth to the center is expected to be very high in SN 1987A at the current epoch. It is unlikely that the compact object that was created will be observed directly in X-rays over the next few decades. Furthermore, we apply the model to the CCO in Cas A, for which the importance of ejecta absorption has been discussed but we nd that it is negligible. This paper also investigated how much variance that can be introduced by asymmetries, dierent progenitors, and dierent SN types. We also conclude that the absorption properties are relatively similar for both the BSG and RSG progenitors. The dierent density proles only have a minor impact on the absorption. However, the total mass is a very important factor. Not only does more material imply higher absorption, but it also results in lower expansion velocities and tends to smooth out any asymmetries. We stress that these conclusions rely on a limited number of models and the assumptions that go into the SN simulations and their In this paper, we compare the same 3D models (as in Paper II) based on neutrino-driven SN simulations with early X-ray and gamma-ray observa tions of SN 1987A. The early emission refers to the direct and reprocessed emission that originates from the radioactive decay of elements that were synthesized in the explosion. The important physical processes for the ra diation transfer are Compton scattering and photoabsorption. The general behavior is that a photon is produced by a radioactive decay with a typ ical energy of around 1 MeV. In this energy regime, Compton scattering dominates and photoabsorption is negligible. Compton scattering does not destroy the photon but the photon energy is reduced and scattered into a new propagation direction. A large number of interactions and energy re ductions slowly shift the photons into the low-energy regime where photoab sorption becomes increasingly important. Photoabsorption starts becoming important below 100 keV but the exponential dependence causes a sharp cuto around 20 keV. This means that each photon is randomly scattered around inside the ejecta and the question is essentially how much energy the photon manages to escape with or if it is absorbed. From the models, it is possible to perform computer simulations of the photon propagation. We compare these predictions with observations of SN 1987A during the rst 1000 days. There were numerous space-based and balloon-borne instruments that performed measurements. They provided spectra and light curves in the 10200 keV range, which captures the emis sion that has scattered several times before escaping. There are also more limited data available around 1 MeV that shows the temporal evolution of the fluxes of the direct line emission, primarily the two most important lines We nd that the model predictions agree well with observed data. There are minor indications that slightly more mixing of the fastest trace amounts of nickel is needed and that the bulk of the nickel is moving away from us faster than what is found in the models. The dierent non-stripped RSG and BSG progenitors show very similar emission features. The stripped envelope Type IIb model evolves much faster and is much brighter because of its lower ejecta mass and higher expansion velocities. The asymmetries and 3D structures primarily aect the magnitude of the flux but the shapes of the Chapter 6. Summary of the Attached Papers spectra and light curves are rather insensitive to the viewing direction. We also nd that the progenitor surface metallicity determines the low-energy photoabsorption X-ray cuto, which potentially allows for constraints on the progenitor metallicity. Future observations of the X-ray continuum with NuSTAR are able to detect SNe up to 310 Mpc and INTEGRAL/SPI can measure the direct line emission from SNe within 0.22 Mpc. This paper is a search for SN SBOs. SBOs are short flashes produced when the explosion shock breaks the progenitor surface. The SBO leads the main SN emission, which is when SNe are detected. Therefore, SBOs need to serendipitously occur within the FoV of an X-ray telescope that is observing another target. For reference, typical XMM-Newton images contain several tens of sources. The SBO would then need to later be identied as a peculiar background source and studied further. Based on theoretical predictions, a signicant number of SN SBOs were predicted to have been serendipitously observed by XMM-Newton. Despite the predictions, this paper is the rst We use all available XMM-Newton data between 2000 and 2019, result ing in a total exposure time of approximately 160 Ms (5 years) after all ltering criteria. We develop a custom algorithm that identies X-ray tran sients in general. This search would, in principle, nd any X-ray transient that is clearly identiable as a transient within an individual observation. The upper limit is the observation duration, which ranges from 20 to 140 ks. The lower limit is the temporal resolution of XMM-Newton, which limits the search sensitivity to transients longer than 1 s. Even though the search algorithm is quite general, all 12 (potentially) extragalactic transients we discovered are at least reasonable SN SBO candidates. All candidates are spectrally soft and have timescales ranging from 100 s to 10 ks, in reasonable agreement with SN SBO predictions. To complement the X-ray data, we use available optical survey data to identify host galaxies and constrain the redshift. This is only possible for some of the sources and can only be done to a varying degree of condence. From the X-ray and the optical data, we infer physical properties of the SN and its progenitor. The best candidates are fully consistent with theoretical predictions for a typical SBO from a BSG. This is the type predicted to be most commonly serendipitously observed. A few other candidates require lesser modications to match the BSG SBO predictions. In this context, this implies corrections due to asymmetries or CSM. Both are expected to some degree and it is natural to expect a few such examples within our sample. There are also indications that two or three of the candidates might be of even more exotic origin, and a few might be contaminating flares from foreground dwarf stars. The quality of the available data prevents us from robustly determining the true origins of many of the transients. Finally, we note that our sample of X-ray transients is important to aid identications of future serendipitously discovered X-ray transients by, for example, eROSITA. If transients are discovered in real-time, deep multi wavelength follow-up observations can be triggered, which would allow us to fully capitalize on these rare opportunities. Paper V is a detailed spectral and temporal X-ray analysis of SN 1987A. The focus is primarily toward the higher end of the X-ray spectrum covered solely by NuSTAR, a waveband of SN 1987A little studied before. This part of the X-ray spectrum holds important information about potential cosmic ray acceleration and emission from a neutron star. Lower X-ray energies have been extensively studied and are dominated by thermal emission origi nating from the shocks between the ejecta and CSM. Many lines are present in the spectrum, which robustly show that the emission must be thermal since no other hypothesized components would produce any lines. This bright thermal emission could hide other, non-thermal components, which is the main motivation for studying the NuSTAR energy range. However, to properly model the NuSTAR spectra, we need a wide spectrum covering the entire X-ray range. Therefore, we also include XMM-Newton data in By analyzing the entire X-ray spectrum and its evolution, we conclude that there is no evidence for any substantial non-thermal contribution. The X-ray spectrum is adequately described by three thermal shock components of dierent temperatures. The need for three dierent components is not surprising due to the complex structure of the CSM. It is primarily a con sequence of the very dierent densities in the dense ER and the low-density high-latitude regions. On the other hand, if a non-thermal component is present and contributing signicantly, it would need to be harder and start dominating toward higher energies. Observationally, this would mean that the spectrum extends to higher energies and that tted thermal models re quire higher temperatures. We do not observe this, and even if this was observed, a faint thermal contribution at higher energies is expected from the reverse shock. Such a contribution would need to be disentangled from non-thermal emission from relativistic electrons or a neutron star. With limited data quality, these components would likely be challenging to sep arate. However, as mentioned above, the observed spectrum does not re quire an additional high-energy component. The temporal evolution of the Chapter 6. Summary of the Attached Papers X-ray spectrum also shows no indication of multiple components. For these reasons, we conclude that there is no need to invoke additional emission Largely separate from the main focus, we also study a number of radioac tive lines. The radioactive lines produced by radioactive decay are easier to interpret and infer physical properties from since they are less aected by modeling assumptions. Importantly, given that the decay timescales are known, the emission is proportional to isotope mass, which is otherwise hard to constrain and serves as an important diagnostics for SN explosion simulations. Lines from 44Ti and 55Fe are produced within the observed X-ray interval. Two lines from 44Ti are detected and we nd similar results as previous analyses of these lines, whereas we provide an upper limit on Future NuSTAR observations are important complements to the more sensitive low-energy instruments. The unique capabilities of NuSTAR are critical to answer some of the most interesting future questions concerning possible new processes that are present in SN 1987A. In this chapter, I take the opportunity to connect all the papers included in this thesis and discuss conclusions on a higher level than what is done within the individual papers. This will highlight some of the overlaps between the papers and where they support and connect to each other. This chapter also touches upon connections to a few subsequent papers by other authors, primarily related to the compact object in SN 1987A. I also outline possibilities for future studies and their relevance to active research questions. Additionally, I briefly mention some short studies, which are often inspired by the papers but not published. These are predominantly very quick analyses that were worth briefly exploring, but not part of a complete paper. Some parts of this chapter are also more speculative. 7.1 The Compact Object in SN 1987A Paper I is a comprehensive study of constraints on the compact object in SN 1987A. It is comprehensive in the sense that it uses data from all wave lengths, as well as investigates the reprocessing between dierent wave bands. The reprocessing relies on a large number of underlying physical phenomena. These are critical to consider since any hypothesis needs to be physically consistent with all available data. A prediction in Paper I is that the thermal emission from the surface of the neutron star is photoabsorbed, re-emitted in UVOIR, subsequently dust absorbed, and nally re-emitted as thermal dust emission at millimeter wavelengths (several hundred GHz). In the paper, we conclude that this Chapter 7. Conclusions and Future Prospects is the most likely scenario for the neutron star in SN 1987A. Cigan et al. (2019) later reported the presence of a localized hotspot in the millimeter dust emission of SN 1987A observed by ALMA. However, the signicance of this excess is limited by the poor data quality. Therefore, it is not necessarily a conrmation of the original prediction in Paper I, but rather a possible hint, which is consistent with the prediction. In particular, the millimeter excess was only observed at one frequency, which implies that the total energy is challenging to constrain. A theoretical, follow-up study by Page et al. (2020) found that the ALMA blob matches predictions for thermal emission of a cooling neutron star. However, I remain cautious and argue that it is important to obtain higher-quality ALMA images of the dust in the future. This is necessary to draw rm conclusions about the thermal emission from a neutron star in SN 1987A. In contrast to Paper I, Paper V focuses solely on X-rays from SN 1987A, but investigates a number of dierent possible origins of the X-ray emission. One potential emission component origin is a neutron star, in the form of a PWN. From the spectral analysis, we conclude that there is no observational support to include such a component in addition to the dominant thermal component. This is further motivated by the multi-wavelength picture from Paper I, as well as the modeled X-ray absorption properties of Paper II. However, an independent analysis by Greco et al. (2021) using similar data sets nds that the X-ray spectrum cannot be explained by purely thermal processes and require a neutron star contribution (see also Section 4.4.3 of Greco 2021). This is in contrast to our conclusions in Paper V, but Paper V only nds no support for a neutron star contribution. Essentially, we argue that invoking a neutron star would be to add an additional component to a model that already ts the data. This means that a neutron star is formally consistent with the X-ray data, albeit considered unnecessary by us based purely on the X-ray analysis in Paper V. Importantly, strong reasons against a neutron star X-ray contribution come from Papers I and II. This is because adding a neutron star contri bution in X-rays aects the complete physical model across all wavebands. From Paper II, we know that practically all emission below 10 keV from a neutron star must be absorbed. This absorption does not apply to the thermal X-ray emission because it is produced by interactions with the ISM outside of the ejecta. Consequently, if a neutron star is to produce any meaningful fraction of the observed X-ray emission, it would also serve as a substantial energy injection into the ejecta. This then connects to the energy budget discussion in Paper I, where we conclude that the balance between total energy output of the central ejecta in SN 1987A is balanced by the known contribution from the decay of radioactive isotopes. Only very little room is left for an additional power source in SN 1987A. It is  7.2. Pulsars in Young Supernova Remnants from all the arguments above, we favor the purely thermal model for the X-ray emission and argue that the only tentative indication of the compact object is the localized ALMA emission. it will likely be challenging to improve this situation much within the foreseeable future. The most promising avenues are fu ture ALMA observations or the next-generation ground-based UVOIR tele scopes. ALMA could potentially provide suciently improved data quality to allow more robust conclusions, but this depends to some extent on the spatial distribution of the dust around the neutron star. Future UVOIR observations will oer signicant technical improvements, but will still be largely limited by the presence of dust along the line of sight. Any detection in X-rays is, unfortunately, probably unlikely. From Paper II, we nd an optical depth of 3 at 2 keV in about the year 2070. This implies that any soft X-ray component will likely be completely absorbed for a long time to come, and a hard X-ray contribution is not expected. To summarize, we likely need to be quite lucky to obtain any convincing evidence of a neutron star in SN 1987A in the near future. 7.2 Pulsars in Young Supernova Remnants Paper II presents a model for photoabsorption and Compton scattering in young SNRs. Young in this context is approximately several hundred years or possibly more, depending on the individual SN conditions. We primarily used the model for the analysis of the SN 1987A X-ray spectrum. However, the model is general and applies to most other SNe (possibly with some scaling factors) and to photon energies of a few MeV. In this section, we discuss how this model could be used in searches for extragalactic PWN (beyond the satellites of the Milky Way). Even though these objects have been suggested to be detectable (Bahcall et al., 1970; Perna and Stella, 2004; Medvedev and Poutanen, 2013), none have yet been detected. This is in principle analogous to the SN 1987A neutron star search in Paper I. The strategy here is to go to larger distances and search for brighter objects (Figure 3.4), instead of searching very deeply in the closest Identifying a young PWN would provide valuable insight into the birth properties of neutron stars, which are currently poorly constrained. It would also potentially allow for studies of the evolution of young pulsars. In addition to studies of the pulsar and its surroundings, the properties of the neutron star are also an important diagnostic for the SN explosion mechanism. In some cases, the neutron star could play a critical role in the explosion. This would be a very important detection, especially if the SN Chapter 7. Conclusions and Future Prospects The paper shows that ejecta are opaque at below 10 keV X-rays for several decades. This means that any nearby SN that is old enough to be transparent for soft X-ray likely would not have been detected at the time of explosion. Reasonable completeness of SN surveys even to the closest tens of galaxies was only achieved within the last few decades. Nearby in this context is typically 210 Mpc. Within this distance, it is realistic for current X-ray telescopes to detect bright PWNe while the number of potential sources is suciently high. The expected SN rate is approximately 1 per year within 10 Mpc (Botticella et al., 2012; Horiuchi et al., 2013; Xiao and Eldridge, 2015). Paper II also shows that the intrinsic asymmetries could signicantly aect the amount of absorption, further motivating a Observationally, there are a few dierent approaches to this problem. The rst option is to search at the locations of known SNe detected within the last 100 years (the rst detected extragalactic SN was SN 1885A in the Andromeda Galaxy). The sensitivity of soft X-ray telescopes to a centrally located X-ray source would only be meaningful for SNe older than at least a few decades. Only relatively few (30) such objects are known and the quality of the available data of the SNe themselves is typically low. Studies of the late-time X-ray properties of these SNe have not found any clear evidence for the presence of a PWN (Perna et al., 2008; Soria and Perna, 2008; Patnaude et al., 2011; Ramakrishnan and Dwarkadas, 2020). Another approach is to blindly search among the X-ray sources in nearby galaxies. The idea would be to distinguish young PWNe by the characteris tic strong spectral absorption signatures predicted in Paper II. Further clues could be obtained from the temporal evolution, either within the observa tion or between epochs if the eld has been observed several times. Many X-ray sources are variable to some degree, whereas a PWN is expected to be practically constant, similar to the Crab (Kirsch et al., 2005). I attempted to identify such sources by quickly scanning archival XMM-Newton data, but failed to nd any convincing candidate. The main diculty is to disen tangle PWNe from other strong X-ray sources. The primary contaminants are ultraluminous X-ray sources (ULXs), which are likely mostly accreting neutron star binaries (e.g. Bachetti et al. 2014). There are more than 300 candidate ULXs in nearby galaxies (Earnshaw et al., 2019), and the ex pected number of bright pulsars is much lower (Medvedev and Poutanen, 2013). Separating these sources, therefore, requires more careful work, but the prospects for identifying interesting candidates are promising. Finally, it is possible to focus on data above 10 keV. These are less aected by absorption, which primarily allows for deeper constraints during the rst few years to decades when the ejecta are photoabsorption thick but Compton thin. However, the drawback is that hard X-ray instruments  7.3. Magnetar-driven Superluminous Supernovae (primarily NuSTAR) are less sensitive. nearby galaxies but found no candidate PWNe. This is not very surprising since very few sources are detected above 10 keV by NuSTAR. However, a population of young, bright PWNe is expected and will likely be identied 7.3 Magnetar-driven Superluminous Paper II can also be used when searching for magnetars in Type I SLSNe. This is the subcategory of SNe which is hypothesized to be powered by magnetars. Even though they are called magnetars, they are fundamentally the same as other neutron stars. The choice of specic term is primarily determined by context, neutron star parameters, and if pulsations have been observed. The terminology is, unfortunately, not consistent. Magnetars in this context are very similar to the pulsars described in the section above, but with faster spins and higher magnetic eld strengths (Nicholl et al., 2017; Blanchard et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2021). Observation ally, a SLSN is observed, and the presence of a magnetar is inferred from the optical observations of the SLSN. Therefore, SLSNe might signal the birth of the most extreme neutron stars, eectively pointing us to the most suitable candidates for deep X-ray searches (Figure 3.4). These SNe are very rare, but also very bright. This implies that the observed population is located at distances greater than 100 Mpc. These neutron stars still remain potentially observable despite the large distances because the magnetars are exceptionally powerful for a few years (Figure 3.5). The combination of a fast rotation and strong magnetic eld is suggested to be what makes There are no direct X-ray detections of the central magnetar (Margutti et al., 2018), except for one tentative candidate (Levan et al., 2013). Pre dictions for X-ray observations are complicated by the additional energy input from a magnetar. This is because the energy injection aects the hydrodynamics (Chen et al., 2016; Blondin and Chevalier, 2017) and the ionization state of the gas (Metzger et al., 2014). A fully self-consistent model would incorporate these factors in three dimensions, in addition to the progenitor properties and explosion physics. This is computationally unfeasible and no model accounts for all these factors simultaneously. Our models in Paper II capture the hydrodynamics driven by the neutrino heat ing self-consistently in three dimensions. By looking at separate studies of the magnetar feedback in the literature, we could perform speculative corrections to our models in an attempt to correct for these eects. This Chapter 7. Conclusions and Future Prospects has been done and the models have been used to better plan for future observations of X-ray observations of engine-driven transients. An important consequence of the high luminosities of these magnetars is that the neutron star energy is drained much more quickly. Fundamentally, the only power source in this simplied model is the rotational energy of the neutron star. This implies that the magnetar fades on timescales of a few years. We note that the timescale depends sensitively on the magnetic eld strength, which basically determines how quickly the rotational energy is being tapped. The short timescales lead to a trade-o between the mag netar decaying and the absorption decreasing when planning observations. Therefore, it might be advantageous to observe above 10 keV where the ab sorption is lower, implying that observations could be performed at earlier epochs. The hard X-ray instruments are less sensitive but this could be outweighed by the higher source luminosities. I briefly explored the prospects for dierent X-ray observations by insert ing a magnetar model into modied versions of the SN models presented in Paper II. This set-up is very similar to the analysis performed in Paper III, but with the radioactive sources replaced by a central magnetar. This is highly simplied, but the results indicated that NuSTAR could be more sensitive than soft X-ray instruments at 300 d. The optimal epoch for an observation would still depend on the magnetar properties, primarily the Papers III and IV touch upon the asymmetries of SN explosions and SN simulations. These papers serve as tests for the set of simulations used for the SN models presented in Paper II (see also Jerkstrand et al. 2020 and Utrobin et al. 2021). The early X-ray and gamma-ray properties studied in Paper III show that some models could produce a sucient level of asym metries, especially if a suitable viewing angle was chosen. The connection between the SBO candidates in Paper IV and the SN asymmetries is more speculative, but they indicate that asymmetries might signicantly lengthen the duration of the burst compared to spherically symmetric models. This is also seen directly from the SN simulations (Wongwathanarat et al., 2015). All things considered, the 3D SN simulations models based on neutron heating (Paper II) seem to slightly underestimate the level of asymmetries. It is at least clear that none of the models studied in Paper III overestimated the level of mixing. A possible factor that could introduce stronger asym metries is the properties of the progenitor. 3D simulations of oxygen-shell burning just prior to core collapse show that large-scale, large-amplitude asymmetries develop (Yadav et al., 2020; Yoshida et al., 2021). These may have important implications for the SN explosion and it will be interesting to compare SN simulations based on 3D progenitor models with observations. It is also possible that other factors contribute in addition to the progeni tor structure, such as late-time heating by radioactive decay (Gabler et al., 2021) or energy injection from the compact object (Blondin and Chevalier, 2017). Qualitatively, any additional factors are likely further amplifying any asymmetries, which would help alleviate the tensions between simulations In Paper IV, we searched for SN SBOs and found 12 candidates. In the paper, we primarily focused on how they compared to predictions for SN SBOs and discussed their implications in this context. Even though they are good candidates, the entire sample most likely contains objects of other Interestingly, if these sources are extragalactic but not SBO related, they would be even more exotic transients (Jonker et al., 2013; Glennie et al., 2015; Bauer et al., 2017; Xue et al., 2019). It is hard to draw rm conclusions solely based on the X-ray data and we are looking to obtain optical observations of the host galaxies to clarify their nature. The results of Paper IV are also useful for predicting the number of transients in other X-ray archives and for future telescopes. In principle, it is also possible to estimate the volumetric rates of these X-ray transients, but this is more challenging and requires further study. In the paper, we briefly mention that the expected detection rate for eROSITA is two transients similar to the SBO candidates per year. eROSITA launched on 2019 July 13 and started its science survey on 2019 December 13. So far, no comparable X-ray transient has been published, but we believe that candidates likely will be reported in the near future. The predicted rate should be fairly robust since the capabilities of eROSITA are comparable to those of XMM-Newton. There might also be undiscovered X-ray transients in the archives of other X-ray telescopes (Sapir et al., 2013). Yang et al. (2019) searched 19 Ms (0.6 years) of Chandra data, but only recovered two previously published transients (Bauer et al., 2017; Xue et al., 2019). This is only a fraction of the entire Chandra archive and more interesting objects are likely yet to be discovered. I have slightly modied the search script used in Paper IV to run on NuSTAR data, but found nothing. This was just a quick search to look for obvious objects of interest in 110 Ms (3.5 years) of data. The ROSAT archive could potentially also be worth searching systematically. Even though the telescope operated during the 90s, its ability to detect bright transients is not much worse than that of XMM-Newton. Previous ROSAT searches focused on dierent types of transients (Vikhlinin, 1998; Chapter 7. Conclusions and Future Prospects Greiner et al., 2000), and the 33 Ms (1 year) exposure of pointed Position Sensitive Proportional Counter (PSPC) observations could potentially hold The discussion so far, as well as Paper IV, solely focuses on intra observation transients. In practice, this limits the duration of the transients to about 10 hours. Another avenue is to search for variability between dif ferent observation epochs, an area that also appears to be under-explored. This could potentially nd phenomena related to active galactic nuclei, tidal disruption events, and certain exotic explosive transients (e.g. Levan et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2017; Margutti et al. 2019). In summary, this thesis presents new results primarily based on X-ray obser vations of CCSNe. The overarching theme is to compare new observations with theoretical developments. Specically, we have investigated predic tions based on recent 3D neutrino-driven SN explosion simulations. These models can also be used to tackle other, yet unanswered questions, some of which are outlined above. We have shown the usefulness of some less ex plored avenues for analyzing CCSNe using X-ray observations. Many of the areas studied in this thesis stand to gain signicantly from future research, upcoming X-ray missions, and the possible occurrence of a nearby CCSN. Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array High Energy Stereoscopic System International Astronomical Union International Celestial Reference Frame International Celestial Reference System INTEGRAL INTErnational Gamma-Ray Astrophysics Laboratory Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array Position Sensitive Proportional Counter Spectrograph for INtegral Field Observations in the Near SPectrometer onboard INTEGRAL Ultraviolet, optical, and near-infrared Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D. et al. (2016), Physical Review Letters Abellan, F. J., Indebetouw, R., Marcaide, J. M. et al. (2017), ApJ 842, L24. Adams, S. M., Kochanek, C. S., Gerke, J. R., Stanek, K. Z. and Dai, X. (2017), MNRAS Alpar, M. A., Cheng, A. F., Ruderman, M. A. and Shaham, J. (1982), Nature 300, 728 Arnaud, K. A. (1996), XSPEC: The First Ten Years, in G. H. Jacoby and J. Barnes, eds, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems V, Vol. 101 of Astronomical Society of the Pacic Conference Series, p. 17. Arnett, W. D. (1966), Canadian Journal of Physics 44, 25532594. Arnett, W. D., Bahcall, J. N., Kirshner, R. P. and Woosley, S. E. (1989), ARA&A Arnett, W. D. and Meakin, C. (2011), ApJ 733, 78. Ashworth, Jr., W. B. (1980), Journal for the History of Astronomy 11, 1. Atwood, W. B., Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M. et al. (2009), ApJ 697, 10711102. Baade, W. and Zwicky, F. (1934), Proceedings of the National Academy of Science Bachetti, M., Harrison, F. A., Walton, D. J. et al. (2014), Nature 514, 202204. Bacon, R., Accardo, M., Adjali, L. et al. (2010), The MUSE second-generation VLT instrument, in Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy III, Vol. 7735 of Proc. SPIE, p. 773508. Bahcall, J. N., Rees, M. J. and Salpeter, E. E. (1970), ApJ 162, 737. Bauer, F. E., Treister, E., Schawinski, K. et al. (2017), MNRAS 467, 48414857. Becker, W., ed. (2009), Neutron Stars and Pulsars, Vol. 357 of Astrophysics and Space Bernal, C. G., Page, D. and Lee, W. H. (2013), ApJ 770, 106. Bethe, H. A. (1990), Reviews of Modern Physics 62, 801866. Bethe, H. A. and Wilson, J. R. (1985), ApJ 295, 1423. Bisnovatyi-Kogan, G. S. (1970), Azh 47, 813. Bisnovatyi-Kogan, G. S., Popov, I. P. and Samokhin, A. A. (1976), Ap&SS 41, 287320. Blanchard, P. K., Berger, E., Nicholl, M. and Villar, V. A. (2020), ApJ 897(2), 114. Blondin, J. M. and Chevalier, R. A. (2017), ApJ 845, 139. Blondin, J. M. and Lundqvist, P. (1993), ApJ 405, 337352. Blum, K. and Kushnir, D. (2016), ApJ 828, 31. Blundell, S. and Blundell, K. (2010), Concepts in Thermal Physics, Oxford University Bogdanov, S. (2014), ApJ 790, 94. Boggs, S. E., Harrison, F. A., Miyasaka, H. et al. (2015), Science 348, 670671. Bonnet, H., Abuter, R., Baker, A. et al. (2004), The Messenger 117, 1724. Botticella, M. T., Smartt, S. J., Kennicutt, R. C. et al. (2012), A&A 537, A132. Boyle, W. S. and Smith, G. E. (1970), Bell System Technical Journal 49(4), 587593. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1970.tb01790.x Brahe, T. (1573), De nova et nullius aevi memoria prius visa Stella, 1 edn, Hafniae. Bratton, C. B., Casper, D., Ciocio, A. et al. (1988), Phys. Rev. D 37, 33613363. Briel, U. G., Aschenbach, B., Hasinger, G. et al. (1994), MPE: Garching . Buhler, R. and Blandford, R. (2014), Reports on Progress in Physics 77(6), 066901. Buras, R., Rampp, M., Janka, H. T. and Kifonidis, K. (2006), A&A 447(3), 10491092. Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, G. R., Fowler, W. A. and Hoyle, F. (1957), Reviews of Modern Burrows, A. (1988), ApJ 334, 891908. Burrows, A. (2013), Reviews of Modern Physics 85, 245261. Burrows, A., Dessart, L., Livne, E., Ott, C. D. and Murphy, J. (2007), ApJ 664, 416434. Burrows, A., Hayes, J. and Fryxell, B. A. (1995), ApJ 450, 830. Burrows, A. and Vartanyan, D. (2021), Nature 589(7840), 2939. Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C. and Mathis, J. S. (1989), ApJ 345, 245256. Carter, J. A. and Read, A. M. (2007), A&A 464(3), 11551166. Cash, W. (1979), ApJ 228, 939947. Chakrabarty, D., Pivovaro, M. J., Hernquist, L. E., Heyl, J. S. and Narayan, R. (2001), Chen, K.-J., Woosley, S. E. and Sukhbold, T. (2016), ApJ 832(1), 73. Cheng, T.-P. (2005), Relativity, gravitation and cosmology. A basic introduction, Oxford Chita, S. M., Langer, N., van Marle, A. J., Garca-Segura, G. and Heger, A. (2008), A&A Cigan, P., Matsuura, M., Gomez, H. L. et al. (2019), ApJ 886(1), 51. Colgate, S. A. and White, R. H. (1966), ApJ 143, 626. Compton, A. H. (1923), Physical Review 21, 483502. Copernicus, N. (1543), Nicolai Copernici Torinensis de revolutionibus orbium coelestium Libri VI, 1 edn, Johannes Petreius, Nuremberg. Couch, S. M., Chatzopoulos, E., Arnett, W. D. and Timmes, F. X. (2015), ApJ 808, L21. Couch, S. M. and Ott, C. D. (2013), ApJ 778, L7. Dastidar, R., Misra, K., Hosseinzadeh, G. et al. (2018), MNRAS 479, 24212442. Dotani, T., Hayashida, K., Inoue, H. et al. (1987), Nature 330, 230. Draine, B. T. (2003), ApJ 598, 10261037. Draine, B. T. (2011), Physics of the Interstellar and Intergalactic Medium, Third edn, Earnshaw, H. P., Roberts, T. P., Middleton, M. J., Walton, D. J. and Mateos, S. (2019), Eastman, J., Siverd, R. and Gaudi, B. S. (2010), PASP 122, 935946. Einstein, A. (1905a), Annalen der Physik 322, 132148. Einstein, A. (1905b), Annalen der Physik 322, 891921. Einstein, A. (1916), Annalen der Physik 354, 769822. Eisenhauer, F., Abuter, R., Bickert, K. et al. (2003), SINFONI - Integral eld spec troscopy at 50 milli-arcsecond resolution with the ESO VLT, in M. Iye and A. F. M. Moorwood, eds, Instrument Design and Performance for Optical/Infrared Ground based Telescopes, Vol. 4841 of Proc. SPIE, pp. 15481561. Ertl, T., Janka, H.-T., Woosley, S. E., Sukhbold, T. and Ugliano, M. (2016), ApJ Evans, C. R. and Kochanek, C. S. (1989), ApJ 346, L13L16. Farr, W. M., Sravan, N., Cantrell, A. et al. (2011), ApJ 741, 103. Faucher-Gigu`ere, C.-A. and Kaspi, V. M. (2006), ApJ 643, 332355. Fernandez, R. (2015), MNRAS 452, 20712086. Fischer, T., Whitehouse, S. C., Mezzacappa, A., Thielemann, F.-K. and Liebendorfer, Flamsteed, J. (1725), Historia Coelestis Britannicae, tribus Voluminibus contenta (1675 1689), (1689-1720), vol. 1, 2, 3, London: H. Meere; in folio; DCC.f.9, DCC.f.10, Frank, J., King, A. and Raine, D. J. (2002), Accretion Power in Astrophysics: Third Edition, UK: Cambridge University Press. Fryer, C. L. and Warren, M. S. (2002), ApJ 574, L65L68. Fryer, C. L. and Warren, M. S. (2004), ApJ 601, 391404. Fukuda, S., Fukuda, Y., Hayakawa, T. et al. (2003), Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 501(2), 418462. Gabler, M., Wongwathanarat, A. and Janka, H.-T. (2021), MNRAS 502(3), 32643293. Gal-Yam, A. (2017), Observational and Physical Classication of Supernovae, in A. W. Handbook of Supernovae, ISBN 978-3-319-21845 8. Springer International Publishing AG, 2017, p. 195, Springer International Pub Gal-Yam, A. (2019), ARA&A 57, 305333. Galilei, G. (1632), Dialogo DI Galileo Galilei Linceo matematico spraordinario dello stvdio DI Pisa., 1 edn, Per Gio: Batista Landini, Florence. Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M. et al. (2006), Space Sci. Rev. 123, 485606. Giacconi, R., Gursky, H., Paolini, F. R. and Rossi, B. B. (1962), Physical Review Letters Glennie, A., Jonker, P. G., Fender, R. P., Nagayama, T. and Pretorius, M. L. (2015), Gnedin, O. Y., Yakovlev, D. G. and Potekhin, A. Y. (2001), MNRAS 324, 725736. Gotthelf, E. V., Halpern, J. P. and Alford, J. (2013), ApJ 765, 58. Grebenev, S. A., Lutovinov, A. A., Tsygankov, S. S. and Winkler, C. (2012), Nature Greco, E. (2021), X-ray Spectroscopy of Ejecta and Compact Objects in Supernova Rem nants, PhD thesis, Universit`a degli Studi di Palermo. Greco, E., Miceli, M., Orlando, S. et al. (2021), ApJ 908(2), L45. Grefenstette, B. W., Fryer, C. L., Harrison, F. A. et al. (2017), ApJ 834, 19. Grefenstette, B. W., Harrison, F. A., Boggs, S. E. et al. (2014), Nature 506, 339342. Greiner, J., Hartmann, D. H., Voges, W. et al. (2000), Astronomy and Astrophysics Gunn, J. E. and Ostriker, J. P. (1969), Nature 221(5179), 454456. Halpern, J. P. and Gotthelf, E. V. (2010), ApJ 709, 436446. Hammer, N. J., Janka, H.-T. and Muller, E. (2010), ApJ 714, 13711385. Hanke, F., Marek, A., Muller, B. and Janka, H.-T. (2012), ApJ 755, 138. Hanke, F., Muller, B., Wongwathanarat, A., Marek, A. and Janka, H.-T. (2013), ApJ Harris, R. (2007), Modern Physics, 2 edn, Pearson. Harrison, F. A., Craig, W. W., Christensen, F. E. et al. (2013), ApJ 770, 103. Herant, M., Benz, W. and Colgate, S. (1992), ApJ 395, 642653. Herant, M., Benz, W., Hix, W. R., Fryer, C. L. and Colgate, S. A. (1994), ApJ 435, 339 Hess, V. F. (1912), Phys. Z. 13, 10841091. Hewish, A., Bell, S. J., Pilkington, J. D. H., Scott, P. F. and Collins, R. A. (1968), Nature Hinton, J. A. and the HESS Collaboration (2004), New Astron. Rev. 48, 331337. Hirata, K., Kajita, T., Koshiba, M., Nakahata, M. and Oyama, Y. (1987), Physical Review Letters 58, 14901493. Hix, W. R. and Harris, J. A. (2017), The Multidimensional Character of Nucleosynthe sis in Core-Collapse Supernovae, in A. W. Alsabti and P. Murdin, eds, Handbook of Supernovae, ISBN 978-3-319-21845-8. Springer International Publishing AG, 2017, Ho, W. C. G. (2011), MNRAS 414, 25672575. Hobbs, G., Lorimer, D. R., Lyne, A. G. and Kramer, M. (2005), MNRAS 360, 974992. Horiuchi, S., Beacom, J. F., Bothwell, M. S. and Thompson, T. A. (2013), ApJ 769, 113. Hoyle, F. (1954), ApJS 1, 121. Hoyle, F. and Fowler, W. A. (1960), ApJ 132, 565. Hsu, B., Hosseinzadeh, G. and Berger, E. (2021), arXiv e-prints p. arXiv:2104.09639. Hughes, D. W. (1980), Nature 285, 132133. Hulse, R. A. and Taylor, J. H. (1975), ApJ 195, L51L53. Hwang, U., Laming, J. M., Badenes, C. et al. (2004), ApJ 615, L117L120. IceCube Collaboration, Achterberg, A., Ackermann, M. et al. (2006), Astroparticle Indebetouw, R., Matsuura, M., Dwek, E. et al. (2014), ApJ 782, L2. Ishida, M., Tsujimoto, M., Kohmura, T. et al. (2011), PASJ 63, S657S668. Janka, H.-T. (2012), Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science 62, 407451. Janka, H.-T. (2017), Neutrino-Driven Explosions, Springer International Publishing AG, Janka, H.-T., Gabler, M. and Wongwathanarat, A. (2017), Spatial distribution of ra dionuclides in 3D models of SN 1987A and Cas A, in A. Marcowith, M. Renaud, G. Dubner, A. Ray and A. Bykov, eds, Supernova 1987A:30 years later - Cosmic Rays and Nuclei from Supernovae and their Aftermaths, Vol. 331 of IAU Symposium, Janka, H.-T., Langanke, K., Marek, A., Martnez-Pinedo, G. and Muller, B. (2007), Janka, H.-T., Marek, A. and Kitaura, F.-S. (2007), Neutrino-Driven Explosions Twenty Years After SN 1987A, in S. Immler, K. Weiler and R. McCray, eds, Supernova 1987A: 20 Years After: Supernovae and Gamma-Ray Bursters, Vol. 937 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pp. 144154. Jansen, F., Lumb, D., Altieri, B. et al. (2001), A&A 365, L1L6. Jerkstrand, A., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H. T. et al. (2020), MNRAS 494(2), 2471 Jonker, P. G., Glennie, A., Heida, M. et al. (2013), ApJ 779(1), 14. Kamper, K. W. (1980), The Observatory 100, 34. Kepler, J. (1606), De Stella nova in pede serpentarii, et qui sub ejus exortum de novo iniit, Trigono igneo, 1 edn, Paul Sessius, Praha, Kingdom of Bohemia. Kettula, K., Nevalainen, J. and Miller, E. D. (2013), A&A 552, A47. Kirsch, M. G., Briel, U. G., Burrows, D. et al. (2005), Crab: the standard x-ray can dle with all (modern) x-ray satellites, in O. H. W. Siegmund, ed., UV, X-Ray, and Gamma-Ray Space Instrumentation for Astronomy XIV, Vol. 5898 of Proc. SPIE, Kirshner, R. P., Sonneborn, G., Crenshaw, D. M. and Nassiopoulos, G. E. (1987), ApJ Kunkel, W., Madore, B., Shelton, I. et al. (1987), IAU Circ. 4316. Kushnir, D. and Katz, B. (2015), ApJ 811, 97. Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Ostlin, G. et al. (2011), Nature 474, 484486. Larsson, J., Fransson, C., Spyromilio, J. et al. (2016), ApJ 833, 147. Larsson, J., Spyromilio, J., Fransson, C. et al. (2019), ApJ 873(1), 15. Lattimer, J. M. and Prakash, M. (2001), ApJ 550, 426442. Lentz, E. J., Bruenn, S. W., Hix, W. R. et al. (2015), ApJ 807, L31. Levan, A. J., Read, A. M., Metzger, B. D., Wheatley, P. J. and Tanvir, N. R. (2013), Levenberg, K. (1944), Quarterly of applied mathematics 2(2), 164168. Lin, D., Godet, O., Ho, L. C. et al. (2017), MNRAS 468(1), 783789. Lopez, L. A. and Fesen, R. A. (2018), Space Sci. Rev. 214, #44. Luo, J., Ng, C.-Y., Ho, W. C. G. et al. (2015), ApJ 808, 130. Lyman, J. D., Bersier, D., James, P. A. et al. (2016), MNRAS 457, 328350. MacFadyen, A. I. and Woosley, S. E. (1999), ApJ 524, 262289. Madsen, K. K., Beardmore, A. P., Forster, K. et al. (2017), AJ 153, 2. Madsen, K. K., Harrison, F. A., Markwardt, C. B. et al. (2015), ApJS 220, 8. Manchester, R. N., Hobbs, G. B., Teoh, A. and Hobbs, M. (2005), AJ 129, 19932006. Marek, A. and Janka, H.-T. (2009), ApJ 694, 664696. Margutti, R., Chornock, R., Metzger, B. D. et al. (2018), ApJ 864, 45. Margutti, R., Metzger, B. D., Chornock, R. et al. (2019), ApJ 872, 18. Marquardt, D. W. (1963), Journal of the society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Barlow, M. J. et al. (2015), ApJ 800, 50. Matsuura, M., Dwek, E., Meixner, M. et al. (2011), Science 333, 1258. Matz, S. M., Share, G. H., Leising, M. D., Chupp, E. L. and Vestrand, W. T. (1988), McCray, R. (1993), ARA&A 31, 175216. McCray, R. and Fransson, C. (2016), ARA&A 54, 1952. McKee, C. F. and Ostriker, J. P. (1977), ApJ 218, 148169. Medvedev, A. S. and Poutanen, J. (2013), MNRAS 431(3), 26902702. Meegan, C., Lichti, G., Bhat, P. N. et al. (2009), ApJ 702, 791804. Meier, D. L., Epstein, R. I., Arnett, W. D. and Schramm, D. N. (1976), ApJ 204, 869 Melson, T., Janka, H.-T., Bollig, R. et al. (2015), ApJ 808, L42. Menon, A. and Heger, A. (2017), MNRAS 469, 46494664. Menon, A., Utrobin, V. and Heger, A. (2019), MNRAS 482, 438452. Metzger, B. D., Vurm, I., Hascoet, R. and Beloborodov, A. M. (2014), MNRAS 437, 703 Mezzacappa, A., Liebendorfer, M., Messer, O. E. et al. (2001), Physical Review Letters Milisavljevic, D. and Fesen, R. A. (2015), Science 347, 526530. Mitsuda, K., Bautz, M., Inoue, H. et al. (2007), PASJ 59, 17. Morris, T. and Podsiadlowski, P. (2007), Science 315, 1103. Morris, T. and Podsiadlowski, P. (2009), MNRAS 399, 515538. Muller, B. (2016), PASA 33, e048. Muller, B. and Janka, H.-T. (2015), MNRAS 448, 21412174. Muller, B., Melson, T., Heger, A. and Janka, H.-T. (2017), MNRAS 472, 491513. Muller, B., Viallet, M., Heger, A. and Janka, H.-T. (2016), ApJ 833, 124. Newton, I. (1687), Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Auctore Js. Newton, 1 edn, Swem Library: Jussu Societatis Regiae ac Typis Josephi Streater, London. Nicholl, M., Guillochon, J. and Berger, E. (2017), ApJ 850(1), 55. Nordhaus, J., Burrows, A., Almgren, A. and Bell, J. (2010), ApJ 720, 694703. Ostriker, J. P. and Gunn, J. E. (1971), ApJ 164, L95. Ozel, F. and Freire, P. (2016), ARA&A 54, 401440. Page, D., Beznogov, M. V., Garibay, I. et al. (2020), ApJ 898(2), 125. Page, D., Lattimer, J. M., Prakash, M. and Steiner, A. W. (2009), ApJ 707, 11311140. Patnaude, D. J., Loeb, A. and Jones, C. (2011), New Astron. 16, 187190. Pavlov, G. G., Zavlin, V. E., Aschenbach, B., Trumper, J. and Sanwal, D. (2000), ApJ Perley, R. A., Chandler, C. J., Butler, B. J. and Wrobel, J. M. (2011), ApJ 739, L1. Perna, R., Soria, R., Pooley, D. and Stella, L. (2008), MNRAS 384(4), 16381648. Perna, R. and Stella, L. (2004), ApJ 615(1), 222227. Perna, R., Vigan`o, D., Pons, J. A. and Rea, N. (2013), MNRAS 434, 23622372. Phinney, E. S. (1989), Manifestations of a Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center, in M. Morris, ed., The Center of the Galaxy, Vol. 136 of IAU Symposium, Springer Pilbratt, G. L., Riedinger, J. R., Passvogel, T. et al. (2010), A&A 518, L1. Pinto, P. A. and Woosley, S. E. (1988), Nature 333, 534537. Plucinsky, P. P., Beardmore, A. P., Foster, A. et al. (2017), A&A 597, A35. Plucinsky, P. P., Haberl, F., Dewey, D. et al. (2008), The SMC SNR 1E0102.2-7219 as a calibration standard for x-ray astronomy in the 0.3-2.5 keV bandpass, in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2008: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 7011 of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, p. 70112E. Predehl, P., Andritschke, R., Areev, V. et al. (2021), A&A 647, A1. Prialnik, D. (2000), An Introduction to the Theory of Stellar Structure and Evolution, Cambridge University Press, New York City, NY. Radhakrishnan, V. and Srinivasan, G. (1982), Current Science 51, 10961099. Ramakrishnan, V. and Dwarkadas, V. V. (2020), ApJ 901(2), 119. Rea, N., Borghese, A., Esposito, P. et al. (2016), ApJ 828, L13. Read, A. M., Guainazzi, M. and Sembay, S. (2014), A&A 564, A75. Rees, M. J. (1988), Nature 333, 523528. Reynolds, T. M., Fraser, M. and Gilmore, G. (2015), MNRAS 453, 28852900. Roques, J. P., Schanne, S., von Kienlin, A. et al. (2003), A&A 411, L91L100. Rybicki, G. B. and Lightman, A. P. (1979), Radiative processes in astrophysics, New Ryle, M. and Hewish, A. (1960), MNRAS 120, 220. Sapir, N., Katz, B. and Waxman, E. (2013), The Astrophysical Journal 774(1), 79. Scheck, L., Janka, H.-T., Foglizzo, T. and Kifonidis, K. (2008), A&A 477, 931952. Scheck, L., Kifonidis, K., Janka, H.-T. and Muller, E. (2006), A&A 457, 963986. Shapiro, S. L. and Teukolsky, S. A. (1983), Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: The physics of compact objects, Wiley-Interscience. Shternin, P. S. and Yakovlev, D. G. (2008), Astronomy Letters 34, 675685. Smartt, S. J. (2009), ARA&A 47, 63106. Soker, N. (2010), MNRAS 401, 27932798. Soker, N. (2017a), A minority view on the majority: A personal meeting summary on the explosion mechanism of supernovae, in A. Marcowith, M. Renaud, G. Dubner, A. Ray and A. Bykov, eds, Supernova 1987A:30 years later - Cosmic Rays and Nuclei from Supernovae and their Aftermaths, Vol. 331 of IAU Symposium, pp. 131140. Soker, N. (2017b), Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics 17, 113. Soria, R. and Perna, R. (2008), ApJ 683(2), 767772. Spitkovsky, A. (2006), ApJ 648, L51L54. Sukhbold, T., Ertl, T., Woosley, S. E., Brown, J. M. and Janka, H.-T. (2016), ApJ Sunyaev, R., Kaniovsky, A., Efremov, V. et al. (1987), Nature 330, 227229. Taddia, F., Sollerman, J., Fremling, C. et al. (2016), A&A 588, A5. Takahashi, T., Kokubun, M., Mitsuda, K. et al. (2016), The ASTRO-H (Hitomi) x-ray astronomy satellite, in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2016: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 9905 of Proc. SPIE, p. 99050U. Takiwaki, T., Kotake, K. and Suwa, Y. (2014), ApJ 786, 83. Tamborra, I., Hanke, F., Janka, H.-T. et al. (2014), ApJ 792, 96. Tananbaum, H. (1999), IAU Circ. 7246. Tashiro, M., Maejima, H., Toda, K. et al. (2018), Concept of the X-ray Astronomy Re covery Mission, in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2018: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 10699 of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Con Taylor, J. H. and Weisberg, J. M. (1989), ApJ 345, 434450. Thompson, A. R., Clark, B. G., Wade, C. M. and Napier, P. J. (1980), ApJS 44, 151167. Trundle, C., Dufton, P. L., Hunter, I. et al. (2007), A&A 471, 625643. Trumper, J. (1983), Advances in Space Research 2(4), 241  249. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0273117782900709 Tsujimoto, M., Guainazzi, M., Plucinsky, P. P. et al. (2011), A&A 525, A25. Utrobin, V. P., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H. T. et al. (2021), arXiv e-prints Vedrenne, G., Roques, J.-P., Schonfelder, V. et al. (2003), A&A 411, L63L70. Vikhlinin, A. (1998), The Astrophysical Journal 505(2), L123L126. Vink, J. (2012), A&ARv 20, 49. Walborn, N. R., Lasker, B. M., Laidler, V. G. and Chu, Y.-H. (1987), ApJ 321, L41L44. Wang, L. J., Yu, H., Liu, L. D. et al. (2017), ApJ 837(2), 128. Wang, L., Wheeler, J. C., Hoflich, P. et al. (2002), ApJ 579, 671677. Weisskopf, M. C., Brinkman, B., Canizares, C. et al. (2002), PASP 114, 124. Weisskopf, M. C., Tananbaum, H. D., Van Speybroeck, L. P. and ODell, S. L. (2000), Chandra X-ray Observatory (CXO): overview, in J. E. Truemper and B. Aschenbach, eds, X-Ray Optics, Instruments, and Missions III, Vol. 4012 of Proc. SPIE, pp. 216. West, R. M., Lauberts, A., Schuster, H.-E. and Jorgensen, H. E. (1987), A&A 177, L1 White, G. L. and Malin, D. F. (1987), Nature 327, 3638. Winkler, C., Courvoisier, T. J.-L., Di Cocco, G. et al. (2003), A&A 411, L1L6. Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T. and Muller, E. (2010), ApJ 725, L106L110. Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., Muller, E., Pllumbi, E. and Wanajo, S. (2017), ApJ Wongwathanarat, A., Muller, E. and Janka, H.-T. (2015), A&A 577, A48. Woosley, S. E., Heger, A. and Weaver, T. A. (2002), Reviews of Modern Physics 74, 1015 Wootten, A. and Thompson, A. R. (2009), IEEE Proceedings 97, 14631471. Xiao, L. and Eldridge, J. J. (2015), MNRAS 452, 25972605. Xue, Y. Q., Zheng, X. C., Li, Y. et al. (2019), Nature 568(7751), 198201. Yadav, N., Muller, B., Janka, H. T., Melson, T. and Heger, A. (2020), ApJ 890(2), 94. Yang, G., Brandt, W. N., Zhu, S. F. et al. (2019), Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro nomical Society 487(4), 47214736. Yoshida, T., Takiwaki, T., Kotake, K. et al. (2021), ApJ 908(1), 44. Zhang, W., Woosley, S. E. and Heger, A. (2008), ApJ 679, 639654.