Master’s Thesis in Physics

X-ray spectral analysis of the radio-loud

narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxy

RX J1633+4718

Dennis Alp

Particle and Astroparticle Physics,

School of Engineering Sciences

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

Stockholm, Sweden, July 6, 2016

Cover illustration: Geometry of the black hole region in RX J1633+4718. The
black circle represents the central supermassive black hole. A standard accretion
disk that extends to the innermost stable circular orbit is observed (red to yellow).
The results indicate that RX J1633+4718 hosts a relativistic jet with a jet base or
corona (gray). Partial obscuration is also observed (red).

Scientiﬁc thesis for the degree of Master of Science in the subject area of Physics.

TRITA-FYS-2016:36
ISSN 0280-316X
ISRN KTH/FYS/--16:36--SE

c(cid:13) Dennis Alp, July 6, 2016
Printed in Sweden by Universitetsservice US AB, Stockholm, July 6, 2016
Typeset in LATEX

Abstract

An X-ray spectral analysis of the radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxy
RX J1633+4718 is presented, including spectral ﬁtting and spectral variability. Four
observations by XMM-Newton and four by Suzaku from 2011 and 2012 were stud-
ied, in addition to a pointed observation by ROSAT from 1993. Main features of the
0.1–10 keV spectrum are clear signatures of intrinsic absorption around 2 keV, lack
of accretion disk reﬂection characteristics and an unusual excess below 0.3 keV. The
apparent lack of reﬂection could be explained by highly ionized reﬂection medium
or intrinsically low reﬂection because of relativistic beaming away from the disc.
The soft X-ray excess in Seyfert galaxies is typically observed above 0.3 keV and it
is shown that the excess in RX J1633+4718 is adequately modeled by a blackbody.
This is in contrast to other sources where the ﬁtted blackbody temperatures typ-
ically are inconsistent with standard accretion disk theory. The temperature and
luminosity of the blackbody are 31+2
−3 eV and 7 × 1044 erg s−1, respectively. This is
in agreement with standard accretion disk theory when independent optical mass
estimates (∼4 × 106 M⊙) are used. Future observations and further analysis of
archival ROSAT data may reveal blackbody contributions in other sources, poten-
tially allowing for spin measurements through disk continuum ﬁtting or serving as
an independent mass estimate.

iii

iv

Contents

Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iii

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Author’s Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Background

2.1 AGN components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 AGN classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies
. . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 Uniﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Eddington limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Accretion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.1 Thin disk accretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Continuum emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5.1 Disk blackbody emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5.2 Compton scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6 X-ray spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7 RX J1633+4718 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Telescopes and instruments

3.1 XMM-Newton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Suzaku . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 ROSAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Observations and data reduction

4.1 XMM-Newton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Suzaku . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 ROSAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Spectral ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

v

1
2
2
3

5
5
9
10
11
13
14
14
16
17
18
20
23

25
25
28
29

31
31
33
35
36

vi

5 Light curves

Contents

5.1 Short timescales
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Long timescales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 Observed ﬂux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Intrinsic luminosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 Hardness

6 Spectral analysis

6.1 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.1 Power law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.2 Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.3 Blackbody emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.1.4 Variability of model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Reﬂection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Flux-selected spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Discussion

7.1 Blackbody and soft X-rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Reﬂection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3 Origin of variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3.2 Long timescales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.4 Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.5 RX J1633+4718 compared to other AGNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.6 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Short timescales

8 Summary and conclusions

9 Acknowledgments

A Contour plots of reﬂection parameters

Bibliography

37
37
39
39
39
42

45
45
45
47
50
54
57
61

65
65
69
70
70
71
72
73
74

77

79

85

91

Chapter 1

Introduction

An active galactic nucleus (AGN) is the central, dense region of a galaxy. Several
characteristics set AGNs apart from regular galaxies. Most striking is the emitted
radiation. AGNs emit an exceptionally large amount of radiation, an indicative
value is a bolometric luminosity of L ∼ 1045 erg s−1 (= 2.5 × 1011 L⊙), but AGN
luminosities span more than nine orders of magnitude in general, and some AGNs
are among the most luminous persistent sources of radiation. Furthermore, the
spectrum of an AGN commonly extends over more than ten orders of magnitude in
frequency, ranging from radio to X-ray wavelengths, and in some cases extending
even further into γ-rays. Besides characteristic continua, AGNs emit very strong
and broad spectral lines. Some AGNs launch powerful relativistic particle jets which
may generate vast radio lobes (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

AGNs display variability on diﬀerent timescales. Observed variability on time-
scales of days implies that the source must be very compact since the spatial extent
of the source is constrained by the light travel distance for a given time, i.e. due
to causality. The prevailing model is that AGNs are fueled by accretion of matter
onto a supermassive black hole (SMBH) located in the center of the galaxy (Lynden-
Bell, 1969). The energy released is part of the gravitational potential energy of the
infalling matter, which is converted to radiation in the accretion process.

The importance of AGNs has become increasingly clear over the past decades
and has given rise to signiﬁcantly increased activity in the ﬁeld. The size of a
SMBH is very small in comparison to the size of its host galaxy, the ratio is roughly
the same as that of a coin compared to the Earth. However, there is compelling
evidence that AGNs are strongly connected to their hosts. For instance, the mass of
the SMBH (M) and the mass of the host bulge (Mbulge) tightly follows the relation

Mbulge ≈ 200M

(1.1)

(Kormendy and Ho, 2013), which shows that there is an active interplay between
the SMBH and the host.

1

2

Chapter 1.

Introduction

The emission from AGNs spans almost the entire spectrum, but emission in
diﬀerent energy bands typically originates from distinct parts of the AGN. Radio
emission is generally taken to be an indication of a jet whereas optical emission is
primarily emitted by gas and dust at an intermediate distance from the SMBH. A
signiﬁcant fraction of the total bolometric luminosity of an AGN is emitted in X-ray,
which is generated in the innermost regions. The dominant processes driving the
X-ray emission are accretion, jets, and coronas, all of which display unique spectral
and temporal features. Secondary eﬀects such as relativistic disk reﬂection and
absorption along the line-of-sight are also commonly studied. This makes X-ray
analysis a very powerful tool when exploring the inner regions, which are otherwise
unresolvable or only weakly emitting at other wavelengths (Fabian, 2016; Reynolds,
2016).

1.1 Aim

The AGN of focus for this study is RX J1633+4718.
It has previously been re-
ported to exhibit unique spectral features, primarily an unusual, soft excess below
0.3 keV (Yuan et al., 2010). The favored explanation is that the accretion disk is
directly seen as blackbody emission for this source. However, new data are now
available using signiﬁcantly more powerful instruments. It is therefore of interest to
use all data to further investigate the claim. Additional goals are to study the entire
X-ray spectrum in the 0.1–10 keV with the purpose of ﬁnding a consistent picture
of the underlying physical processes in the innermost regions of RX J1633+4718.

1.2 Outline of the Thesis

The thesis is organized as follows. The background is provided in chapter 2 followed
by a description of relevant telescopes in chapter 3. Details concerning observations
and data reduction are given in chapter 4. The main results on variability are
described in chapter 5, while chapter 6 presents the spectral analysis. This is
followed by a discussion in chapter 7. Finally, a summary and conclusions are given
in chapter 8.

An assumed standard ΛCDM cosmology with Hubble constant H0 =
70 km s−1 Mpc−1 and cosmological constant ΩΛ = 0.73 will be used (Komatsu
et al., 2011), i.e. the default ﬂat cosmology of XSPEC (Arnaud, 1996). A photon
index Γ following the deﬁnition N (E) ∝ E−Γ will be used, where N is number
ﬂux and E is photon energy. The centimeter-gram-second system of units will be
used unless otherwise stated. Reported energies are in the observed frame with the
exception for intrinsic luminosity and the default conﬁdence level is 90 %, although
one standard deviation is also used in some plots and will be clearly stated. Fit
statistics are presented as χ2/d.o.f. = χ2
red where χ2 is the standard ﬁt statistic,
d.o.f. is the number of degrees of freedom, and χ2

red is the reduced ﬁt statistic.

1.3. Author’s Contribution

3

1.3 Author’s Contribution

All plots and ﬁgures were made by the author unless clearly cited in the caption.
Everything else presented in this thesis is original work by the author. This is
including, but not limited to, data reduction and analysis, development of the
routines used throughout the process, and ﬁnally the writing of the thesis.

4

Chapter 2

Background

The purpose of this section is to outline the essential physical concepts and phe-
nomena. The reader is introduced to AGN structure in general in section 2.1 and
AGN classiﬁcation in section 2.2. The concept of Eddington limit is described in
section 2.3 and diﬀerent accretion models are presented in section 2.4. Emission
processes are studied in section 2.5, which leads on to section 2.6 on X-ray spectra,
which describes observational signatures based on diﬀerent physical scenarios. Fi-
nally, a summary of properties and previous studies of RX J1633+4718 is provided
in section 2.7.

2.1 AGN components

AGNs consist of several diﬀerent components, shown in ﬁgure 2.1. The largest
scale structure in AGNs are jets, which are observed in ∼10 % of all AGNs. Jets
are powerful, highly relativistic outﬂows of particles that are generated on small
scales but extend to Mpc-scales in extreme cases (e.g. Willis et al., 1974). Rel-
ativistic velocities causes apparent superluminal motion to be observed in some
cases (e.g. Pearson et al., 1981). It has been suggested that weaker jets are formed
but unsuccessfully launched in more AGNs, naturally making them more diﬃcult
to detect (Ghisellini et al., 2004). Jets have been traced all the way down to the
innermost parts of AGNs (e.g. Junor et al., 1999; Krichbaum et al., 1998) and
are believed to be generated by magnetohydrodynamic processes (Blandford and
Payne, 1982). However, the details regarding their formation still remain poorly
understood (McKinney et al., 2012). Although some observational diﬃculties arise
due to orientation eﬀects, compelling evidence show that jets come in pairs, which
are launched in opposite directions. An additional characteristic property of jets
is strong radio emission. This makes jetted AGNs some of the strongest observed
radio sources despite the extragalactic distances (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

5

6

Chapter 2. Background

Figure 2.1: A schematic showing the principal components of an AGN. The illus-
tration is not to scale but it can be said that it is closer to a logarithmic than a
linear scale in terms of distance from the center. Several details are debatable, such
as the exact geometry of the torus and accretion disk, the depicted shapes are only
indicative. Figure courtesy of Middelberg and Bach (2008).

2.1. AGN components

7

The narrow-line region (NLR) is a region found at a distance of ∼100–
3000 pc (Netzer, 2013). Although the NLR occupies a large volume, its opacity
is relatively low due to a low density. The NLR is given its name by the small
width of the spectral lines from this region. The width of the narrow lines gener-
ally vary between 200 km s−1 and 900 km s−1 (Osterbrock and Ferland, 2006). The
most prominent lines from the NLR are those observed in optical and ultraviolet
(UV). Forbidden lines are also observed in the NLR. The term “forbidden” is some-
what misleading. They are simply originating from quantum mechanically highly
unlikely transitions. Forbidden lines are only observed when the density of the gas
is low, else collisions would trigger emission through allowed transitions. Forbidden
lines are denoted by brackets, e.g. [O iii], and have widths that are on the order of
500 km s−1 (Osterbrock and Ferland, 2006). It has been shown that properties of
these spectral lines can be used to infer the accretion rate and the total bolometric
luminosity of AGNs (e.g. Heckman et al., 2005). However, this method suﬀers from
large uncertainties because several assumptions have to be made to link line width
to luminosity.

Even closer to the black hole is the torus. It consists of dust and is located in
a region of radius ∼1–100 pc. The term torus might be slightly misleading since
the actual shape might be quite diﬀerent from a torus. One of the most prominent
properties of the torus is its comparatively large optical thickness. The high opacity
leads to signiﬁcant observational diﬀerences depending on the orientation of the
torus with respect to the line-of-sight. As a consequence of the large column density,
the torus acts as a mirror which is capable of reﬂecting the light emitted from the
central parts of the AGN. The outer parts of the torus normally radiate most
strongly in the infrared because almost all of the energy input is either absorbed
or reﬂected at the inner edge (Netzer, 2013).

The next region is the broad-line region (BLR), found at radii . 1 pc. This re-
gion is similar to the NLR in the sense that both share the characteristic of emitting
spectral lines, mainly in optical and UV. However, as implied by the terminology,
the lines emitted in the BLR are broader due to the higher gas velocity. Observed
widths typically correspond to gas velocities of 1000–5000 km s−1 (Osterbrock and
Ferland, 2006). Furthermore, the BLR also has a higher density than the outer
regions. Since the BLR extends almost all the way to the black hole, it is possible
to observe variability on timescales of a few days. It is important to emphasize that
the BLR is located inside the torus. Emission is therefore blocked unless viewed
along the symmetry axis of the torus (Netzer, 2013).

The innermost part of a an AGN is the black hole region, a term which includes
the black hole as well as the accretion disk. Almost all of the gravitational potential
energy that is used to fuel an AGN is converted in the accretion disk. Observations
of the black hole region is usually made at X-ray energies, although observations are
not possible for all AGNs because of obscuration by surrounding gas. The radius
of the black hole region is ∼10−3 pc, which makes emission from this region highly
variable, sometimes on timescales as low as a few minutes (Itoh et al., 2013).

2.2. AGN classiﬁcation

9

Standard accretion disk theory commonly assumes that the disk extends to the
innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO), beyond which no stable orbits exist. This
radius is rISCO = 3rS = 6GM/c2 for a non-spinning black hole. Accretion disks
will be discussed in detail in section 2.4.

2.2 AGN classiﬁcation

There are several terms used in AGN research to classify diﬀerent types of AGNs
based on a variety of observed properties. The general approach is to construct
categories depending on certain parameters. AGNs are commonly categorized based
on the optical and UV emission line properties, namely depending on the width of
the emission lines. A distinction is also made between radio-quiet and radio-loud
based on the ratio between radio and total bolometric luminosity (Krolik, 1999).
Variability, polarization and luminosity are also distinguishing factors, although
the reason for luminosity being a classiﬁer is largely historical in the sense that
luminosity is an apparent feature, rather than representing qualitatively diﬀerent
underlying physical processes.

Having deﬁned the possible attributes for an AGN, all that remains is to assign
attributes to diﬀerent AGN categories. The ﬁrst AGNs to be identiﬁed were Seyfert
galaxies, named after Carl K. Seyfert, who described this class in 1943 (Seyfert,
1943). Seyferts are subdivided into Seyfert 1s and Seyfert 2s. Seyfert 1s show very
broad allowed lines such as Hα and Hβ, narrower forbidden lines, notably [O iii], as
well as narrow allowed lines, although the narrow lines are signiﬁcantly broader than
corresponding lines emitted by normal galaxies. The widths indicate that allowed
lines are emitted from both the NLR and BLR whereas forbidden lines originate
in the NLR. Seyfert 2s have both allowed and forbidden narrow lines but no broad
lines, i.e. only emission from the NLR is observable. Aside from the spectral lines,
both types of Seyferts emit a relatively smooth continuum. As for Seyfert 1s, the
continuum commonly provides enough power to outshine the entire host galaxy,
making the AGN appear pointlike. At least 90 % of the Seyferts appear to reside
in spiral galaxies (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

Another class of AGNs is radio galaxies, which are characterized by strong radio
emission, up to several million times the radio luminosity of a normal galaxy. Radio
galaxies can be subdivided into broad-line radio galaxies (BLRGs) and narrow-line
radio galaxies (NLRGs), deﬁned analogously to Seyfert 1s and Seyfert 2s, respec-
tively. Radio galaxies emit radiation from giant radio lobes outside of the galaxy
or from a central region with a size comparable to the size of the galaxy. The radio
power emitted is supplied by powerful particle jets generated in the AGN, which
interact with the matter they encounter. Lastly, it should be noted that the host
galaxies generally are ellipticals (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

Astronomers started identifying an increasing number of radio sources around
the 1960s, which appeared stellar in some respects. The sources were therefore
called quasi-stellar radio sources, which subsequently were dubbed quasars. The

10

Chapter 2. Background

most striking property of quasars is the high bolometric luminosity, 5 × 1046 erg s−1
being a typical value. Quasars are also divided into radio-loud and radio-quiet,
where radio-quiet constitutes 90 % of the total quasar population. Similarly to radio
galaxies, quasars are found in elliptical galaxies, but the ratio of the luminosity
at higher frequencies to radio luminosity is much higher than for radio galaxies.
The number of quasars per comoving volume was 1000 times higher at redshift
z = 2 than at present times, meaning that most quasars are observed at great
distances. However, quasars are still relatively easy to detect owing to their high
luminosity (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

Yet another class of AGNs is blazars, which in turn is divided into the two
subcategories BL Lac objects and ﬂat spectrum radio quasars (FSRQs). BL Lacs
are distinguished by highly linearly polarized optical light, rapid variability and
continua with very weak spectral lines. FSRQs are much the same as BL Lacs
but with signiﬁcantly higher luminosity and, in some cases, broad emission lines.
Similarly to quasars, blazars are observed at cosmological distances and 90 % of
the resolved blazars are found to have elliptical hosts (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013).

The above-mentioned classiﬁcation gives an idealized overview of the diﬀer-
ent AGN classes and is not comprehensive. Unfortunately, the real situation is
complicated by the fact that many features are not as bimodal as the classiﬁca-
tion suggests, it is common for features to vary continuously between the extremes.
Consequently, categories such as Seyfert 1.5 galaxies can be found in literature (e.g.
Keck et al., 2015; Osterbrock, 1977), representing an intermediate class between
type 1 and type 2 Seyferts.

2.2.1 Radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies

RX J1633+4718 is a radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 (RLNLS1) galaxy. A more
detailed description of this subclass is therefore provided. Its parent class, narrow-
line Seyfert 1 galaxies (NLS1s), is a subcategory of AGNs that was ﬁrst identiﬁed
by Osterbrock and Pogge (1985). NLS1s are generally thought to be young Seyfert
galaxies (Mathur, 2000).

NLS1s are deﬁned by having narrow permitted lines, i.e. lines with a full width at
half maximum (FWHM) less than 2000 km s−1 (Goodrich, 1989). Their permitted
lines are only slightly broader than forbidden lines (Osterbrock and Pogge, 1985)
and the [O iii]λ5008 emission line is weak, customarily deﬁned as [O iii]/Hβ <
3 (Shuder and Osterbrock, 1981). Finally, NLS1s also display strong Fe ii emission
lines (Goodrich, 1989).

Typical characteristics of NLS1s are strong X-ray variability and relatively high
luminosities. They also commonly display steep soft X-ray spectra with a consider-
able soft X-ray excess (Zhou et al., 2006). These characteristics indicate compara-
tively low central black hole masses in the range ∼106–108 M⊙ and high accretion
rates, i.e. close to or above the Eddington limit (Grupe et al., 2010). NLS1s are
generally radio-quiet with a radio-loudness deﬁned as R = Sradio/Soptical smaller
than 10, where Sradio and Soptical usually are taken to be the spectral ﬂux densities

2.2. AGN classiﬁcation

11

at 6 cm and 4400 Å, respectively, following Kellermann et al. (1989). Only ∼7 % are
categorized as radio-loud and ∼2.5 % being very radio-loud, i.e. R > 100 (Komossa
et al., 2006). NLS1s are also normally hosted in spiral galaxies (Foschini, 2011) and
it is widely believed that they are being viewed from a pole-on orientation (Berton
et al., 2016).

One of the general distinctions between Seyfert 1s and Seyfert 2s was the
existence of broad emission lines in type 1s. Thus, it might seem like NLS1s
would be more appropriately classiﬁed as type 2s. However, NLS1s exhibit strong
high-ionization lines such as [Fe vii] and [Fe x] and a strong continuum which are
typical for Seyfert 1s (Osterbrock and Pogge, 1985).
In addition, the criterion
[O iii]/Hβ < 3 is more typical for Seyfert 1s as the ratio is higher for Seyfert 2s
in general. NLS1s also show X-ray variability characteristics similar to those of
Seyfert 1s (Carroll and Ostlie, 2013). Finally, it is worth pointing out that NLS1s
have remarkably soft X-ray emission (Boller et al., 1996; Crummy et al., 2006;
Leighly, 1999; Meier, 2012).

Radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies (RLNLS1s), which constitute ∼7 % of
the NLS1 population, have attracted a great deal of attention recently due to the
discovery of high-energy γ-ray emission as well as apparent superluminal motion
in some cases (Abdo et al., 2009; D’Ammando et al., 2012, 2015; Yao et al., 2015).
Combining these observations, it is possible to conclude that RLNLS1s emit highly
relativistic jets (D’Ammando et al., 2012). This makes RLNLS1s challenge the
picture that a very high black hole mass is necessary to launch jets since NLS1s
are thought to be of relatively low mass. In addition, jet-launching AGNs typically
reside in ellipticals in contrast to RLNLS1s, which are believed to be hosted by
spiral galaxies similar to NLS1s (Foschini, 2011).

2.2.2 Uniﬁcation

Although AGN classiﬁcation is seemingly complicated, several properties can be
explained solely in terms of orientation. This is commonly referred to as AGN
uniﬁcation. Orientation essentially determines if the central region can be observed
along the symmetry axis of the torus, or if it is obscured by the torus. Proper-
ties unique to the central region are, for example, variability on short timescales
and broad emission lines. Eﬀectively, this means that type 1 and 2 objects are
intrinsically the same but viewed at diﬀerent inclination.

Orientation of jets also further simpliﬁes the categorization. Radio-loudness
is a direct consequence of the AGN having jets. This creates a simple relation
between radio galaxies, blazars and quasars. An illustration can clearly visualize
the uniﬁcation as variations in orientation and existence of jets, shown in ﬁgure 2.3.

The uniﬁed model is simple and eﬀects due to orientation are expected. Fur-
ther support comes from spectropolarimetry which is capable of separating out the
emission that has been scattered, eﬀectively allowing observations round the torus.
This has revealed an obscured broad line region in type 2 galaxies (e.g. Antonucci

12

Chapter 2. Background

Figure 2.3: AGN uniﬁcation scheme based on orientation. Figure courtesy of Beck-
mann and Shrader (2012).

2.3. Eddington limit

13

and Miller, 1985). However, observations show that additional parameters such as
the black hole mass, accretion rate and absorber geometry have to be taken into
account to fully explain all observed features.

2.3 Eddington limit

In the extreme environments of an accreting SMBH it is necessary to take the pres-
sure of the emitted radiation into account. Of central importance is the Eddington
luminosity, named after Arthur Eddington, at which the outward radiative pressure
on the infalling matter balances the inward gravitational force. Hence, in a simpli-
ﬁed picture, the Eddington luminosity serves as an upper limit to the luminosity
of an accreting object.

A rough derivation can be made by assuming spherical symmetry, dynamic
equilibrium and by approximating the gas that absorbs the radiation with pure,
ionized hydrogen. The radiative force Frad exerted by an object with a luminosity
L as a function of distance to the source r is

Frad =

L

4πr2E

×

E
c

× σT

(2.3)

where E is the photon energy, c is the speed of light and σT = 6.65 × 10−29 m2 is
the Thomson cross section for electron scattering. This is more transparent if the
identiﬁcation that the ﬁrst factor L/(4πr2E) is the number ﬂux of photons, which
is multiplied by the momentum per photon E/c, with an interaction probability
given by the cross section σT. It is also known that the gravitational force Fgrav is
given by

Fgrav =

GM
r2 (mp + me)

(2.4)

where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the central object and mp
and me are the proton and electron mass, respectively. The Eddington luminosity
(LEdd) is the luminosity such that the radiative force equals the gravitational force.
From equations (2.3) and (2.4), LEdd is

LEdd =

4πmpGM c

σT

≈ 1.3 × 1038 M
M⊙

erg s−1

(2.5)

where the approximation mp + me ≈ mp has been made (Melia, 2009).

At ﬁrst it might seem like the Eddington limit simply serves as an upper limit to
the luminosity and consequently the accretion rate. However, it turns out that the
Eddington ratio, deﬁned as L/LEdd, is one of the key parameters that characterize
the underlying physical processes. Some observables inﬂuenced by the Eddington
ratio are emission line properties (Boroson and Green, 1992; Shen and Ho, 2014),
spectral slopes (Boroson, 2002; Shemmer et al., 2008) and evolutionary stage of an
AGN (Mathur, 2000).

14

Chapter 2. Background

2.4 Accretion models

Accretion is the process by which matter is gravitationally attracted and falls onto
a compact, central source. In the context of AGNs, the source is a SMBH residing
in the center of a galaxy. Accretion plays a central role to AGNs because all
energy that is emitted is converted from the infalling matter. In other words, if the
accretion process does not transform kinetic energy into radiation, nothing would
be emitted, regardless of the accretion rate.

It is crucial that the process that drives an AGN is highly eﬃcient, i.e. able to
convert a large portion of the supplied rest mass to radiation. If this was not the
case, an unreasonable amount of fuel would be required to explain the observed
luminosities of AGNs. Eﬃciency is usually measured in terms of an eﬃciency
parameter η deﬁned by

L = η ˙M c2,

(2.6)

˙M is the accretion rate and c is the
where L is the total bolometric luminosity,
speed of light. A comparison between diﬀerent mechanisms can be made. The
eﬃciency of chemical reactions such as burning of coal is ∼10−8 %, that of nuclear
fusion, speciﬁcally 4H → He (a typical stellar process), is ∼0.7 % whereas a typical
value for accretion is ∼10 %. Thus, it is manifestly clear that accretion is highly
eﬃcient.

A basic description of accretion is the Bondi accretion model, named after Her-
mann Bondi (Bondi, 1952). The model describes steady spherical accretion, ignor-
ing the eﬀects of angular momentum which clearly is a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation.
A more sophisticated model is thin disk accretion, which describes accretion in a
geometrically thin and optically thick disk, presented in detail in the following sec-
tion. It should be pointed out that other models exist, such as advection-dominated
accretion ﬂows (Ichimaru, 1977; Narayan and Yi, 1995; Rees et al., 1982) and slim
disk accretion (Abramowicz et al., 1988; Beloborodov, 1998). Advection-dominated
accretion ﬂows describe low-luminosity accretion, i.e. when most energy is advected
into the black hole rather than radiated. The accreting gas is normally hot, optically
thin, and quasi-spherical and has a spectral signature described by a power law,
which is typical for non-thermal emission. Slim disk accretion is invoked at very
high accretion rates. The primary diﬀerence to standard thin disk theory is that
slim disks considers matter which is advected into the black hole before managing
to transform its kinetic energy to radiation because of the high accretion rate.

2.4.1 Thin disk accretion

The angular momentum of accreting matter is the limiting factor for accretion un-
der normal astrophysical conditions. Since the gravitational potential in an AGN
is approximately spherically symmetric and frictional forces come into play, it is
expected that the accreting matter will form a geometrically thin, optically thick
disk. This is known as the standard accretion disk model (Shakura and Sunyaev,

2.4. Accretion models

15

1973). The goal is to determine the spectrum and luminosity, which are the pri-
mary observables, and how they relate to other quantities, e.g. temperature. The
following derivation is a simpliﬁcation of the derivation by Melia (2009), but an
attempt to preserve key physical concepts has been made.

In the remainder of this section the dynamics of a rotating, non-rigid disk are
considered. Let m be the mass of a ﬁctitious particle, v = vr + vφ is the velocity
which is decomposed into a radial vr and azimuthal component vφ. It is clear that
the angular momentum s at radius r is given by

s = mvφr.

(2.7)

Furthermore it can be assumed that the azimuthal velocity is Keplerian, i.e. given
φ/r = GM/r2,
by equating the centripetal with the gravitational acceleration v2
where G is the gravitational constant and M is the black hole mass. The angular
velocity Ω is given by vφ = rΩ, which combined with the Keplerian velocity yields

Ω =

vφ
r

=r GM
r3 .

(2.8)

In the non-rigid disk scenario, random motions of the particles are the main
reason for the energy exchange. It is assumed that particles move between r = A
and r = A + λ = B with velocity ˜v, where λ is a distance which can be though of
as the mean free path and ˜v is the characteristic velocity of the random motion.
The torque (τ) is then given by

τ = ˙MoutBAΩ(A) − ˙MinABΩ(B),

(2.9)

where ˙Mout and ˙Min are the outward and inward ﬂow of matter. The ﬁrst term
can be motivated by noting that AΩ(A) is the velocity of the particle starting at
A, which in its new position has angular momentum BAΩ(A), and the same goes
˙Mout = ˙Min = 2πrΣ˜v where Σ is
for the other particle. At dynamic equilibrium,
the surface density. Thus Σ˜v is the ﬂow of matter per unit length around a loop in
the disk. The diﬀerence Ω(A) − Ω(B) can be thought of a diﬀerential for small λ,
implying

Ω(A) − Ω(B) = −λ

Equation (2.9) can now be written

∂ Ω
∂r

≡ −λΩr.

(2.10)

(2.11)

τ = −2πrΣ˜vABλΩr.

An important deﬁnition will now be made, introduce ν as the viscosity, then

ν = λ˜v = αcsH,

(2.12)

where cs is the speed of sound, H is the height of the disk and α is a system-
dependent parameter (Shakura and Sunyaev, 1973). Although α is unknown, it

16

Chapter 2. Background

is physically reasonable to assert that λ . H and ˜v . cs, thus conﬁning α to
0 < α . 1. Using ν as well as A = r ≈ B, equation (2.11) can be rewritten as

τ = −2πνΣR3Ωr.

Knowing the torque, it is possible to calculate the power emitted (P ) as

P = −Ω

dτ
dr

dr = −(cid:18) d

dr

(τ Ω) − τ

dΩ

dr (cid:19) dr

(2.13)

(2.14)

where the reverse chain rule was used in the last equality. Omitting the mathe-
matical details, the ﬁrst term corresponds to the net outward ﬂow of rotational
energy, i.e. the energy which is not being emitted as radiation. The second term
is of interest because it corresponds to the radiative energy loss. Assume that ν
is independent of r and Ωr → 0 as r approaches the inner radius. It can then be
shown that the second term corresponds to a dissipation rate per unit area

D =

3GM ˙M

8πr3  1 −r rin
r !

(2.15)

where ˙M is the accretion rate and rin is the inner radius of the annular accretion
disk (Melia, 2009).

A few remarks are in order. Firstly, the condition Ωr → 0 when r → rin
has been used. It can be loosely motivated by the idea that the innermost parts
of the accretion disk would be corotating with the central body, which in this
case is extended to include black holes.
If the reader ﬁnds the vague physical
argument unsatisfactory it can simply be argued that it is an approximation, which
is suﬃciently accurate for essentially all practical purposes. Secondly, it was taken

that Ω(r) =pGM/r3, i.e. Keplerian velocity, which is accurate enough. Lastly, it

is clear from equation (2.15) that the dissipation does not explicitly depend on the
viscosity. This should come as no surprise since the accretion rate appears, which
naturally must depend on the viscosity, thus the dissipation still depends on the
viscosity implicitly. The advantage is, however, that the accretion rate is in most
cases easier to determine than the viscosity.

2.5 Continuum emission

Electromagnetic radiation is generally the main observational window in astro-
physics. A natural consequence is that understanding of radiative processes is
essential. This section will study two important processes at a rather superﬁcial
level. The purpose is to give a theoretical background to the observed spectral
characteristics.

2.5. Continuum emission

17

2.5.1 Disk blackbody emission

Section 2.4.1 on thin disk accretion was concluded with an expression for the dissi-
pated energy (2.15). Recall that standard thin disks are optically thick. This can
be derived from the thin disk geometry, e.g. following Melia (2009). Furthermore,
the spectral shape of blackbodies are uniquely deﬁned by the temperature T , which
is related to the dissipated energy per unit area (D) as

σBT 4(r) = D(r),

(2.16)

where σB is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. And by inserting the expression for
D,

1/4

.

(2.17)

T (r) =


3GM ˙M

r !
8πr3σB  1 −r rin


Note that D, and consequently T , is depending on the radius which in turn implies
that the observed spectrum is a sum of blackbody contributions from multiple radii.
Thin disk spectra are therefore also referred to as multicolor blackbody spectra.

The contribution from each radius is given by Planck’s law, which is then inte-

grated over the disk to obtain the observed ﬂux

F =Z rout

rin

2hν 3

1

2πr cos θ dr

c2

hν

kB T (r) − 1

e

d2

(2.18)

as a function of frequency ν for an observer at a distance d observing the disk at
an inclination θ. The multicolor disk spectrum can be divided into three regions.
The low frequency limit determined by the outer radius, which is approximately
described by Rayleigh-Jeans law with a scaling of ν 2. The intermediate spectral
range scales as ν 1/3 covering the region between the extremes. Lastly, the high
energy limit, determined by the inner radius, closely follows Wien’s approximation,
resulting in an exponential cut-oﬀ. The total thin accretion disk spectrum is shown
in ﬁgure 2.4.

The maximum temperature (Tmax) is obtained at r = 49/36 rin under the stan-

dard assumption rin = rISCO. The expression can then be simpliﬁed to

kBTmax = 11.5  M

108 M⊙!−1/4

˙m1/4 (eV)

(2.19)

˙M / ˙MEdd. It is clear that the temperature
where ˙m is the scaled accretion rate, i.e.
is relatively insensitive to both M and ˙m. Take ˙m, which also depends on M, to
be a constant for now.
It is then clear that the temperature relates to mass as
It is also interesting to point out that higher temperatures are
kBT ∝ M −1/4.
˙m varies with time and between
expected for less massive SMBHs.
˙M, i.e.
individual sources. Finally, it is worth noting that ˙m ∝ M −1 for constant
that temperature is constant in this (somewhat unphysical) picture.

In practice,

18

Chapter 2. Background

Figure 2.4: Thin accretion disk spectrum for three diﬀerent rout. The three diﬀerent
intervals characterizing the outer boundary, intermediate region and inner boundary
are clearly seen. Figure courtesy of Ghisellini (2013).

2.5.2 Compton scattering

Compton scattering, named after Arthur Compton (Compton, 1923), is the inelas-
tic interaction between a photon and a charged particle, usually an electron in
astrophysical contexts. This is due to a strong velocity dependence of Compton
scattering and the fact that electrons have the lowest mass and consequently the
highest velocity at a given energy, among the relevant particles. A distinction is
commonly made between the case when the photon gives energy to the electron
and when the photon receives energy from the electron. The term inverse Compton
scattering is commonly used to refer to the latter. This is also the type which is
of greater importance in this context. However, it is essentially only a matter of
choice of reference frame. The following is a derivation which is correct up to a
dimensionless factor, which suﬃces since mainly the qualitative properties of Comp-
ton spectra are of interest. A more detailed derivation can be found in the book
by Rybicki and Lightman (1979).

The ﬁrst step is to determine the change of energy for one photon-particle
interaction. The direction of propagation of the photon is denoted by Ω, c is the
speed of light and E is the energy of the photon. Let γ and m be the Lorentz factor
and the rest mass of the particle, respectively, and deﬁne β ≡ v/c, where v is
the velocity of the particle. Using conventional four-vector notation and requiring

2.5. Continuum emission

four-momentum conservation, the relation

P µ
1 + Qµ

1 = P µ

2 + Qµ
2 ,

19

(2.20)

is obtained, where P µ = E/c(1, Ω) and Qµ = γmc(1, β) are the four-momentum
of the photon and the particle, respectively. Subscript 1 and 2 denotes before and
after collision. By rearranging, squaring and solving for the ratio of the photon
energy before and after the interaction yields

E2
E1

=

1 − β cos ϕ1

1 − β cos ϕ2 + E1

γmc2 (1 − cos θ)

,

(2.21)

where ϕ is the angle between the electron and the photon and θ is the scattering
angle of the photon.

Hitherto, all equations have been in a frame in which the particle generally has
a non-zero velocity, i.e. the frame of an observer. Let primed quantities denote
quantities in the frame in which the particle is at rest before interaction. A sim-
1 ≪ mc2, known as the
pliﬁcation can be made by restricting to the case where E′
2 since the recoil of the elec-
Thomson regime. Note that a consequence is E′
tron can be neglected. An additional constraint is to assume γ ≫ 1 or equivalently
β / 1. Combining the two requirements and using an approximate formula for the
Doppler shift, namely E′ ≈ γE1, gives the Thomson regime limit

1 = E′

E1 ≪

mc2

γ

.

(2.22)

The general relation (2.21) can now be reduced according to

E2
E1

≈

1 − β cos ϕ1

1 − β

=

1 + β
1 − β2 (1 − β cos ϕ1) ≈ 2γ2(1 − cos ϕ1) ∼ γ2,

(2.23)

where relativistic beaming has been taken into account, i.e. cos ϕ2 ≈ 1. Knowing
the energy increase in each interaction, it is straightforward to calculate the total
power. Photons sweep a volume of cσT per unit time, where σT is the Thomson cross
section. Furthermore, since the energy is ampliﬁed by a factor of γ2 per interaction,
the total power P gained by the photons per unit volume is approximately

P = cσTγ2U,

(2.24)

where U is the energy density of photons. Note that using σT as the cross sec-
tion is only valid in the Thomson regime. Additional quantum eﬀects have to be
taken into consideration for large photon energies, eﬀectively reducing the cross
section (Rybicki and Lightman, 1979).

The goal is to obtain the observed spectrum, however, this would require knowl-
edge of the distribution of γ for the electron distribution.
It was assumed that
γ ≫ 1. A thermal distribution is therefore unlikely since very high temperatures

20

Chapter 2. Background

would be necessary. For example, a temperature of 109 K typically corresponds
to γ ≈ 1.4 for electrons. Although, one should keep in mind that the extreme
condition in AGNs makes the assumption of T . 109 K somewhat situational. A
more reasonable scenario in many contexts is to assume a non-thermal distribution,
speciﬁcally a power-law distribution N (γ) dγ ∝ γ−p dγ, where N is the number den-
sity of electrons and p is a constant which characterizes the distribution. Power-law
distributions arise naturally through some processes, e.g. Fermi acceleration (Fermi,
1949). Using the surmised distribution of particles and the emitted power (2.24),
it is straightforward to calculate the spectral proﬁle

dP ∝ γ2γ−p dγ ∝ E− p−1

2 dE,

(2.25)

where E ∝ γ2 has been used in the last step. It is apparent that Compton spectra
are given by power laws with spectral index α = −(p − 1)/2 if the underlying
particle distribution is given by a power law. Thus, it is possible to gain information
about the particle distribution through the observed spectrum. Lastly, note that
the derivation assumed particles with arbitrarily large and small values of γ. In
practice, there will be cut-oﬀs in the spectrum because of limiting values of γ in
the underlying particle distribution.

2.6 X-ray spectra

The X-ray spectra of AGNs consists of several components, shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
Standard accretion disks are expected to emit disk blackbody emission, as shown
in section 2.5.1. Typical temperatures for AGNs with masses of 106–1010 M⊙ are
50–5 eV. A blackbody temperature of 50 eV will have its spectral peak at ∼0.2 keV
and is followed by a very steep cut-oﬀ, as seen in ﬁgure 2.4. These energies are
at the very edge of the X-ray spectrum. Disk blackbody emission is therefore
generally not observed in AGN spectra. However, objects with lower mass have
higher temperature and consequently emit radiation at higher energies, as seen in
equation (2.17). Disk blackbody emission is therefore observed in X-ray binaries,
which have stellar black hole masses.

Another component in AGN X-ray spectra is generated by inverse Compton
scattering in a jet or corona. This component is usually well described by a power
law over a relatively large energy interval. The low-energy limit is generally not
observed, either due to limits in instrumentation or extinction and reprocessing
caused by absorption before reaching the observer. When the source photons in the
upscattering process come from the accretion disk, the inverse-Compton component
is not expected to extend below the typical energy of the disk blackbody emission.
The high-energy roll-over depends on the energy of the electron population and
is not seen below 10 keV, which is close to the upper energy limit for many X-
ray telescopes, for example XMM-Newton and Suzaku. The actual limit varies,
roll-overs as low as 30 keV has been observed in a few sources (e.g. Fabian et al.,
2015) whereas other AGNs extend into γ-rays (e.g. Ackermann et al., 2011). The

2.6. X-ray spectra

21

0
0
2

0
0
1

0
5

0
2

0
1

0.1

]
1
−

V
e
k

 
1
−
s
 
2
−

m
c
[
 

x
u
l
f
 
n
o
t
o
h
P
 
2

V
e
k

1

10

100

Energy [keV]

Figure 2.5: A schematic, intrinsic X-ray spectrum consisting of three theoretically
predicted components. A blackbody component with a temperature of 30 eV is seen
at low energies (solid red). Higher energies are dominated by an upscattered power
law (dotted green) and disk reﬂection (dashed blue). The apparent characteristics of
the reﬂected continuum are strongly dependent on system parameters. For example,
the extent of the red wing depends on black hole spin and the reﬂected continuum
gets increasingly similar to a power law for larger ionization levels. The relative
strength of the components are chosen for visual clarity.

22

Chapter 2. Background

observed γ-ray-emitting source are almost exclusively AGNs with a jet along the
line-of-sight.

A signiﬁcant contribution to observed spectra is expected to come from disk
reﬂection. This emission originates from photons from the jet or corona that scat-
ter against the accretion disk. Reﬂected spectra can be fruitfully thought of as
a combination of a reﬂected continuum and line emission, the most prominent
being the iron Kα line around 6.4 keV. Disk reﬂection occurs at the innermost re-
gions of an AGN and the reﬂected spectra therefore show strong relativistic eﬀects.
Hence, observed iron lines are Doppler shifted, beamed, and gravitationally red-
shifted (Fabian, 2006). The strength of gravitational redshift is strongly dependent
on distance from the SMBH. Thus, the shape of the observed iron line can be used
to estimate the spin of the SMBH since the ISCO depends on spin (e.g. Brenneman
and Reynolds, 2006).

The reﬂected continuum is similar to the incident power-law in the sense that
they span approximately the same energy range. However, reﬂected spectra exhibit
more complex spectral features than plain power laws. It has been shown that the
soft excess can be modelled by disk reﬂection in some sources (e.g. Crummy et al.,
2006). However, reﬂection alone has not been able to fully describe the soft excess
in all AGNs (e.g. Chevallier et al., 2006; Turner and Miller, 2009). It should be
noted that the reﬂected soft excess is a relativistic blur of spectral lines. Reﬂection
is also characterized by a strong contribution at high energies, known as Compton
reﬂection hump. The hump can serve as an indication of the amount of reﬂection in
the source, lifting degeneracies between models at lower energies (e.g. Risaliti et al.,
2013). Furthermore, the reﬂection hump is sensitive to properties of the accretion
disk and its atmosphere. Therefore, it is possible to probe the physics of the disk
and corona by studying the reﬂected spectrum (Reynolds, 2016).

Absorption can signiﬁcantly aﬀect observed spectra. Several diﬀerent types
of absorption are relevant to AGNs. The obscuration that separates type 1s from
type 2s is caused by a dusty torus. Absorption has also been suggested as a possible
explanation for the soft excess (e.g. Chevallier et al., 2006; Turner and Miller,
2009). However, this requires the absorbing matter to be moving with relativistic
velocities (Schurch and Done, 2008). The BLR can also cause absorption (e.g.
Elvis et al., 2004; Puccetti et al., 2007). Typical characteristics are extinction at
soft X-ray energies with relatively unaﬀected hard X-ray spectra. This is because
the penetrating power of X-rays is increasing with energy. A column density on
the order of 1022 cm−2 would cause a strong decrease of ﬂux below ∼2 keV while
the harder X-rays are largely unaﬀected. The gas in the BLR can be thought
of as clouds. Therefore, it is possible that a fraction of the source is observed
directly while the rest is obscured, a phenomenon referred to as partially covering
absorption.

Spectral variability is commonly observed in AGNs. Several diﬀerent eﬀects can
cause spectral variability. One possibility is variable absorption due to changes to
the obscuring material in the BLR (e.g. Elvis et al., 2004; Puccetti et al., 2007). This
primarily changes the ﬂux at lower energies since hard X-rays are more penetrating.

2.7. RX J1633+4718

23

Consequently, the brighter states will be due to stronger contribution from low
energies, eﬀectively leading to a softer-when-brighter trend. Spectral variability
can also arise because of intrinsic changes in the AGN. The most frequent trend
is also softer-when-brighter, however, intrinsic changes can also display a harder-
when-brighter behavior. Harder-when-brighter trends are commonly taken to be
an indication of jet emission from the AGN (Abdo et al., 2010; D’Ammando et al.,
2011; Kataoka et al., 2008).

2.7 RX J1633+4718

RX J1633+4718 (SDSS J163323.58+471859.0) is a radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1
galaxy at redshift z = 0.116 (Foschini et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2012; Yuan et al., 2008).
It was ﬁrst detected in the ROSAT All-Sky Survey (RASS) (Voges et al., 1999) and
was ﬁrst identiﬁed in optical by Moran et al. (1996). A later study showed that the
galaxy hosting the AGN constitutes one galaxy of a galaxy pair, the other being a
starburst galaxy separated by 4 arcsec (Wisotzki and Bade, 1997). The contribution
from the partner galaxy is expected to be negligible at X-ray energies (Yuan et al.,
2010). RX J1633+4718 has an Hβ width of 909 km s−1 (FWHM), an Hβ line ﬂux of
900 × 10−17 erg s−1 cm−2 and an [O iii] line ﬂux of 920 × 10−17 erg s−1 cm−2 (Yuan
et al., 2008). RX J1633+4718 is very radio-loud with a radio-loudness of 167 and a
radio spectral slope of −0.30 deﬁned as the slope between 6 cm and 20 cm (Yuan
et al., 2008). The Galactic column density along the line-of-sight has been measured
to be 1.79 × 1020 cm−2 by the LAB Survey (Kalberla et al., 2005). The mass of
RX J1633+4718 is taken to be 4 × 106 M⊙, which is the arithmetic mean of the
four mass estimates that was found in the literature (Foschini et al., 2015; Järvelä
et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2012; Yuan et al., 2008). An estimate of the bolometric
luminosity of RX J1633+4718 is 3 × 1044 erg s−1 (Yuan et al., 2010), corresponding
to an accretion rate of 0.5 times the Eddington rate.

The most unique feature of RX J1633+4718 is that it shows an unusual, soft
X-ray excess in data obtained by ROSAT , which potentially can be interpreted as
radiation from a standard (geometrically thin, optically thick) accretion disk (Yuan
et al., 2010). A study of RX J1633+4718 by Mallick et al. (2016) was published dur-
ing this thesis project. They detect clear signs of partial absorption using the newer
data from XMM-Newton and Suzaku. Their variability spectrum clearly disfavors
an explanation based on absorption as the source of variability. Furthermore, they
use XMM-Newton data to verify the previous claims concerning the blackbody by
Yuan et al. (2010). However, the blackbody parameters found by Mallick et al.
(2016) are diﬀerent from those of this work, probably because ROSAT data were
not used.

24

Chapter 3

Telescopes and instruments

Data from three X-ray observatories have been used, namely XMM-Newton, Suzaku
and ROSAT. Each instrument oﬀers diﬀerent capabilities and complement each
other in some aspects. A brief technical summary of the relevant devices is provided
in Table 3.1.

One of the great challenges in X-ray astronomy is focusing of X-rays since X-
rays tend to either be transmitted or absorbed, but generally not reﬂected. The
currently most successful solution is to reﬂect the incoming photons against X-ray
mirrors at very small angles (“gracing incidence”), relative to the surface, towards
a focus. This setup requires the mirrors to be nearly aligned with the incoming
X-rays making the eﬀective area small. However, it can be increased by nesting
several mirrors. An illustration of the setup of one of the X-ray mirrors on board
XMM-Newton is shown in Figure 3.1.

Calibration of detectors is a diﬃcult task and small systematic errors are ex-
pected due to instrumental artifacts. This is particularly relevant since data from
several instruments are cross-ﬁtted. It has been shown that Suzaku data yields sys-
tematically higher ﬂuxes and softer photon indices than XMM-Newton data (Ishida
et al., 2011; Kettula et al., 2013; Tsujimoto et al., 2011). The average error over
the energy range 0.3–10 keV is expected to be on the order of a few percent, but
might be energy dependent.

3.1 XMM-Newton

XMM-Newton is a 4000 kg, 10 m long X-ray observatory launched on December
10, 1999 by the European Space Agency (ESA) (Jansen et al., 2001).
It is one
of the cornerstones in the ESA Horizon 2000 programme and is still in service.
The orbit was chosen to be highly eccentric allowing non-interrupted observations
for up to 40 hours. In practice, however, observations are commonly aﬀected by
high background ﬂuxes during distinct intervals due to solar ﬂares. The standard

25

26

Chapter 3. Telescopes and instruments

Detector

PSPC-B
XIS0
XIS1
EPIC pn
EPIC MOS1

Energy range

Spectral resolution

Eﬀective area

[keV]
0.1–2.0
0.4–10.0
0.3–7.0
0.3–10.0
0.3–10.0

(FWHM) [eV]

150–500
100–150
100–150
80–150
70–150

[cm2]

100–250
160–330
110–370
300–1200
100–400

Table 3.1: Technical speciﬁcations of detectors.
It should be emphasized that
several values are approximate, a comprehensive description can be found in the
respective manuals. This is particularly relevant for the spectral resolution and
eﬀective area due to their energy dependencies. Values for XIS3 and MOS2 are
assumed to be equivalent to those of XIS0 and MOS1, respectively.

procedure to account for this in the analysis is to measure the background level and
omit any time periods during which the background exceeds a certain threshold.

There are six science instruments on board XMM-Newton, which can be used
simultaneously. The European Photon Imaging Cameras (EPIC) are the main
X-ray imaging detectors.
It consists of three separate cameras, two metal oxide
semi-conductor (MOS) charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras (Turner et al., 2001)
and the pn-CCD camera (Strüder et al., 2001). There are two identical Reﬂection
Grating Spectrometers (RGSs) (den Herder et al., 2001) providing high-resolution
spectroscopy in the soft X-ray range, covering many lines of interest. The sixth
instrument is the Optical/UV Monitor Telescope (OM) (Mason et al., 2001) with a
30 cm mirror which extends the range of XMM-Newton to UV and optical allowing
simultaneous multi-wavelength measurements.

The OM has a regular mirror which is suitable for optical and UV observations.
The setup for the ﬁve X-ray detectors is more complicated. XMM-Newton has three
identical X-ray telescopes, one of which is equipped with the pn-CCD located at
the focus. One of each RGS and MOS CCD is installed in each of the other two
telescopes’ focal planes. This is made possible by splitting the incoming light using
a reﬂection grating and having the MOS CCD located at the primary focus and
the spectroscopic detector at the ﬁrst diﬀraction maximum, as shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
The chief strength of XMM-Newton lies in its ability to detect faint objects
using its comparatively large eﬀective area. Combining the area of all three X-ray
telescopes gives an eﬀective area of 4650 cm2 at 1.5 keV. The angular resolution
is fair and the point-spread function (PSF), i.e. the image of a point source, has a
relatively constant FWHM of ∼6 arcsec in the range 1.5 keV to 8 keV (Jansen et al.,
2001). Spectral resolution can be measured in terms of resolving power deﬁned as
E/∆E, where ∆E is the smallest measurable energy diﬀerence at energy E. EPIC
has a moderate spectral resolution of 20–50 whereas the resolution of the RGSs is
200–800. The primary drawback of the RGSs is that their eﬀective area is an order

3.1. XMM-Newton

27

Figure 3.1: A schematic of one of XMM-Newton’s telescopes equipped with a re-
ﬂection grating. The incident photons seen on the left-hand side are focused in two
steps by the nested mirrors. The reﬂection grating (inset) then directs 40 % of the
light towards the spectroscopic detector located at the ﬁrst diﬀraction maximum
whereas 44 % reaches the MOS CCD at the primary focus. The telescope equipped
with the pn-CCD is identical with the exception that no grating and secondary
detector are installed (ESA: XMM-Newton SOC, 2015).

3.3. ROSAT

29

Suzaku was equipped with ﬁve X-ray telescopes (XRTs), which focus incom-
ing X-rays onto the base plane where detectors are located, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.2. There were initially six scientiﬁc instruments on board Suzaku; the four
X–ray Imaging Spectrometers (XISs) (Koyama et al., 2007), the X-Ray Spec-
trometer (XRS) (Kelley et al., 2007) and the non-focused Hard X-Ray Detector
(HXD) (Takahashi et al., 2007). Due to technical diﬃculties in the early stages of
the mission, no scientiﬁc data were obtained using the XRS and it will therefore
not be discussed further. The HXD covered the energy range 10 keV to 600 keV
and was a pointing instrument, meaning that it was equipped with a collimator
that limits the ﬁeld of view but lacked imaging capabilities.

The four XISs employed CCDs, not too diﬀerent from the ones in XMM-Newton,
and were located in the focal plane of four of the XRTs. Each XIS consisted of one
CCD and had an eﬀective angular resolution of ∼20 arcsec (FWHM). The energy
resolution was on the order of 100 eV, which varies depending on energy and time
after launch. It is clear that the angular resolution is signiﬁcantly worse than the
∼6 arcsec (FWHM) of EPIC, but the energy resolutions of Suzaku and XMM-
Newton are comparable.

Three of the cameras, namely XIS0, XIS2 and XIS3, were front-illuminated (FI),
whereas XIS1 was back-illuminated (BI). The diﬀerence between the FI cameras
and the BI camera is that the FI have a lower background, higher sensitivity at
higher energies as compared to the BI, which had a higher background but had its
sensitivity shifted towards lower energies. Typical energy ranges are 0.4–10 keV for
the FI CCDs and 0.3-7 keV for the BI CCD. Lastly, it is worth pointing out that
XIS2 suﬀered a micro-meteorite impact on November 9, 2006, leaving the camera
inoperable.

The CCDs were sensitive to optical and UV light and optical blocking ﬁlters
(OBFs) have therefore been installed. It was discovered after launch that the OBFs
accumulate contaminating material which primarily reduces the quantum eﬃciency
below 2 keV. The thickness and composition of this material has steadily been
monitored in order to allow accurate calibration. Furthermore, several residuals
in the spectral response of the CCDs are poorly understood in the 1.6 to 2.3 keV
band. This is due to imperfect modeling of the Si K edge at ∼1.8 keV, the Au M
edge at ∼2.2 keV, the Al K edge at ∼1.6 keV, and possibly the Si Kα ﬂuorescence
line at ∼1.7 keV. Although the calibration has been improved over the past years,
the current state remains uncertain and the residuals are therefore in practice dealt
with on a case-to-case basis. Lastly, it is known that the pointing of Suzaku wobbles
due to thermal expansion. This can be adequately dealt with but requires special
attention by the observer.

3.3 ROSAT

ROSAT (Briel et al., 1994; Trümper, 1982, and references therein), short for the
German word Röntgensatellit, was launched on June 1, 1990 and decommissioned

30

Chapter 3. Telescopes and instruments

on February 12, 1999. It was an X-ray telescope mission led by German Aerospace
Center (DLR) with instruments built by Germany, the United States and the United
Kingdom. ROSAT was launched into orbit at an altitude of ∼580 km, inclination
53◦ and a period of 96 min. The ﬁrst phase of the mission was to perform the
ROSAT All-Sky Survey, which lasted for six months. The remaining time was
devoted to pointed observations of selected sources.

The scientiﬁc instruments on board ROSAT were the X-ray Telescope (XRT)
and the Wide Field Camera (WFC). The WFC was an extreme UV telescope
coaligned with the XRT and designed to cover the 0.04–0.20 keV range. The focus-
ing component of the XRT is the X-ray mirror assembly (XMA) consisting of four
nested grazing incidence mirrors with a focal length of 2.4 m.

There are three detectors in the focus of the XRT, two Position Sensitive Pro-
portional Counters (PSPC-B and PSPC-C) and a High Resolution Imager (HRI)
mounted on a carousel. The HRI is an imaging device at soft X-ray energies ranging
from 0.1 to 2.0 keV with an optimal angular resolution along the optical axis with
a FWHM of roughly 2 arcsec. The two PSPCs are redundant, however, due to a
technical malfunction in the early stages of the mission the PSPC-C was lost. All
pointed observations after RASS were therefore performed using PSPC-B. It oﬀers
spectral coverage in the range 0.1 to 2.0 keV with an eﬀective area of ∼200 cm2
over a majority of the energy range. The spectral resolution is 150–500 eV and
the angular resolution is 10–40 arcsec (FWHM). It is not surprising that ROSAT
performance is slightly worse than that of the more modern Suzaku and XMM-
Newton. However, a strength of ROSAT is the lower limit of the energy range,
which is 0.1 keV compared to 0.3 keV of Suzaku and XMM-Newton.

Chapter 4

Observations and data
reduction

RX J1633+4718 was detected by RASS and was later the target of a pointed obser-
vation (denoted R1) by ROSAT. Four observations (denoted S1. . . ) were performed
by Suzaku over the course of a year. The XIS devices were operating during all
observations, except for XIS2 which was damaged prior to the ﬁrst observation.
Four observations (denoted X1. . . ) were also performed by XMM-Newton over
roughly the same time span. Data from all XMM-Newton and Suzaku observations
were used in the data analysis. However, due to the low ﬂux, only data from the
EPIC and XIS devices were analyzed. As for ROSAT, only data from the PSPC-B
pointed observation was kept for further analysis. A summary of all observations
is provided in Table. 4.1

4.1 XMM-Newton

The reduction of the data from XMM-Newton was made using the Science Analy-
sis Software v.15.0.0 and the calibration database was updated on February
5, 2016. Only data from the three EPIC cameras were used. The raw event lists
were ﬁltered using good time intervals (GTIs) based on the level of background
ﬂares which were deﬁned following the standard criteria of Smith (2015). The
GTIs for the three EPIC cameras were combined using AND to form a merged GTI
which ensures that data from the three cameras can be combined when making the
spectral analysis.

Events were ﬁltered based on the merged GTI described above and PATTERN
criteria following ESA: XMM-Newton SOC (2014), with the exception of FLAG ==
0. The FLAG property is used to indicate the reliability of an event. An example
of unwanted events are potential particle triggers. The option FLAG == 0 is more
conservative than the standard option as FLAG == 0 also rejects events next to CCD

31

32

Chapter 4. Observations and data reduction

Instrument

ROSAT

Suzaku
XMM-Newton
Suzaku
XMM-Newton
Suzaku
XMM-Newton
Suzaku
XMM-Newton

Obs. ID
RASS
701549

706027010
0673270101
706027020
0673270201
706027030
0673270301
706027040
0673270401

Counts

1000
9000
20000
8000
21000
12000
16000
9000
8000

Start time
1990–1991

1993-07-24T10:32:05
2011-07-01T19:41:23
2011-07-09T05:50:23
2011-07-18T12:06:54
2011-09-12T22:24:18
2012-01-13T20:59:37
2012-01-14T15:56:47
2012-02-05T16:16:04
2012-03-14T10:20:01

Exposure [ks]

3.9
40.0
21.7
37.5
22.4
44.1
14.8
45.5
10.5

Table 4.1: A chronological summary of all observations of RX J1633+4718. The
exposure times are the sums of all times during which the devices were operating
within the good time intervals (GTIs), but before correcting for the live time of the
detectors, since live time is detector-dependent. Details regarding the GTIs vary
between instruments and can be found in the respective sections. The counts are
the sum of total net source counts for all instruments during each observation. It
is worth noting that there is a gap of almost 20 years after the ROSAT observa-
tions, during which no X-ray observations of RX J1633+4718 were made. Also note
that the third Suzaku observation almost overlaps with the third XMM-Newton
observation.

4.2. Suzaku

33

edges and known bad pixels. PATTERN serves a similar purpose but is purely based
on the pixel which is triggered and which of its near-neighbors that also registers a
trigger (a geometrical “pattern” is thus deﬁned for each event). Events which show
a signiﬁcant signal in a large cluster of pixels are likely particle events. A complete
description can be found in ESA: XMM-Newton SOC (2014, particularly ﬁgure 12
and 13).

Only events in the energy range 0.3–10 keV were kept for further analysis. The
soft and hard bands are henceforth deﬁned as 0.3–2 keV and 2–10 keV, respectively.
Images were created using the ﬁltered sets, and a circle of radius 34 arcsec centered
on the SDSS coordinates was chosen as the source region for all exposures. Dif-
ferent background regions were selected for the diﬀerent cameras and observations
due to CCD gaps, instrument orientation and relative locations of other sources.
Background regions were chosen following the guidelines presented in ESA: XMM-
Newton SOC (2014). For the pn camera the backgrounds were extracted from the
same RAWY coordinate and CCD chip as the source. In the case of the MOS cameras
the backgrounds were extracted as close to the PSF as possible since the guideline
is to choose a region at the same oﬀ-axis angle and CCD chip as the source, which
was on the optical axis. A typical sky image taken by the pn camera, including the
extraction regions, is shown in ﬁgure 4.1. The redistribution matrix (RMF) and
ancillary response function (ARF) were generated for each observation using the
SAS tasks rmfgen and arfgen, respectively.

When the ﬂux is relatively high, it is possible for several photons to deposit
their energy in a single pixel between two read outs. This will result in a single
event with higher energy, an eﬀect known as pile-up. A typical manifestation is a
decreased count rate towards the center of the PSF or a distribution of PATTERNs
that is inconsistent with that of random single photon events. Potential pile-up
was checked using epatplot and no signiﬁcant pile-up was detected. The spectra
were grouped to have at least 25 counts per bin to allow for usage of χ2-statistics
in the spectral analysis. The parameter oversample was set to 3, preventing any
energy bins to be smaller than one third of the energy resolution FWHM at a given
energy. Correction for vignetting, detector live time, scaling to compensate for the
PSF outside the source region and other eﬀects were mainly performed by the tasks
epiclccorr and arfgen for the light curves and spectra, respectively (ESA: XMM-
Newton SOC, 2014). The light curves were background subtracted and corrected
for several instrument errors using the default options of epiclccorr.

4.2 Suzaku

The data from Suzaku were reduced using HEAsoft version 6.18 which includes
Suzaku FTOOLS Version 22 (Blackburn, 1995). Only data from the two front-
illuminated XIS0 and XIS3 and the back-illuminated XIS1 were used. The cali-
bration database (CALDB) was updated on Mars 8, 2016 and the unﬁltered data
were reprocessed using aepipeline with default parameters to ensure that the same

4.3. ROSAT

35

pipeline version was applied to all observations. The temporal ﬁltering based on
GTIs was also performed at this stage as a part of the pipeline. Thermal wobbling
was corrected for using aeattcor2 and xiscoord and no pile-up was detected by
pileest.

Spectra, light curves, and images were generated using extractor. Only events
in the energy ranges 0.4–10 (FI) and 0.3–7 keV (BI) were kept for further analysis.
Furthermore, the events in the interval 1.5–2.3 keV were excluded due to uncertain
calibration. No strong spectral features are seen in the interval in the XMM-Newton
spectra and the results remain essentially unchanged if the poorly calibrated range
is included. The decision to exclude the interval was based on the description
of the current state found in ISAS/JAXA/NASA (2013) and ISAS/JAXA/NASA
(2015). The source region was deﬁned to be a circle of radius 260 arcsec centered
on the SDSS coordinates. Additionally, the background region was chosen to be
an annulus of inner radius 260 arcsec and outer radius 360 arcsec for all exposures.
The backgrounds were centered on the source and extracted from each CCD. The
RMF and ARF were generated using xisrmfgen and xissimarfgen, respectively.
The spectra were then grouped analogously to the XMM-Newton data. How-
ever, no task in Suzaku FTOOLS considers the oversampling of the energy resolution.
Instead, the energy resolution was calculated using the information contained in the
response ﬁle, i.e. the product of the RMF and ARF. The response eﬀectively de-
scribes the probability of an incident X-ray photon with a certain energy being
detected in a particular spectral channel, as well as accounting for the physical
properties of the detector and telescope. Utilizing this information, it is straight-
forward to compute the energy resolution FWHM as a function of energy and group
the spectra accordingly. The trailing channels were grouped together despite the
count being lower than 25, however, it was veriﬁed that the last channel always fell
outside of the accepted energy interval. It should be pointed out that the minimum
25-count requirement was enforced alongside the oversampling criteria.

The Suzaku light curves were obtained using extractor and background sub-
tracted using lcmath. No other corrections were applied meaning that the count
rate unit is instrument dependent because of vignetting, bad pixels, dead time (due
to readout), CCD gaps, quantum eﬃciency of the detector, eﬀective area of the
telescope, and PSF outside of the source region. For XMM-Newton data, the ef-
fects were all corrected for by epiclccorr, however, the count rate is still expressed
in terms of counts per second and not a physical unit such as counts per second per
unit area. This is due to subtleties in the error correction. For instance, the de-
tector response used by epiclccorr is less accurate than the one used for spectral
analysis since epiclccorr uses a default response for computational eﬃciency.

4.3 ROSAT

The ROSAT data were reduced using HEAsoft version 6.18. The source extraction
region was a circle centered on the SDSS coordinates with a radius of 120 arcsec

36

Chapter 4. Observations and data reduction

and the background was an annulus with inner and outer radii 240 and 360 arc-
sec, respectively. RX J1633+4718 was observed on-axis allowing use of the response
matrix pspcb_gain2_256.rsp (formerly known as pspcb_93jan12.rmf), which was
taken from NASA’s anonymous ftp1. Finally, the same spectral binning procedure
as for Suzaku data was applied to the ROSAT data, making all the spectra compa-
rable. Only data in the energy range 0.1 to 2.0 keV was used for spectral analysis.
Although the absolute energy interval is relatively small, it is worth emphasizing
that the energy range of ROSAT extends to lower energies than either Suzaku or
XMM-Newton.

4.4 Spectral ﬁtting

All ﬁts were performed using XSPEC 12.9.0i (Arnaud, 1996) with default options.
As described above, the binning was made such that every spectral bin contained at
least 25 counts for all data sets, allowing for the use of χ2 statistics. The reduced χ2
from diﬀerent instruments are comparable since the binning also took oversampling
into account.

Galactic absorption was included in all models using the XSPEC model phabs
with a frozen column density of 1.79 × 1020 cm−2 (Kalberla et al., 2005). It was
veriﬁed that exchange of phabs for wabs or tbabs made no signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
The redshift was frozen to z = 0.116 for all redshifted model components, i.e. all
components with a z preﬁx. Other parameters are assumed to vary freely (within
default limits) decoupled from each other unless stated otherwise.

The XMM-Newton data were ﬁtted over the 0.3–10 keV interval. All EPIC de-
tectors were coupled by tying the parameters without introducing additional cross-
normalizations between the cameras. Fitting is less straightforward for Suzaku
because the diﬀerent cameras have diﬀerent energy ranges. XIS0 and XIS3 were
ﬁtted over 0.4–10 keV whereas XIS1 was ﬁtted over 0.3–7 keV. Furthermore, the
interval 1.5–2.3 keV was excluded for all XIS cameras because of uncertain cali-
bration. Consistency between the XIS cameras was veriﬁed for all observations,
allowing for simultaneous ﬁtting using all XIS data. Lastly, data from ROSAT ’s
PSPC-B was ﬁtted from 0.1 to 2 keV. This setup of cameras and energy ranges will
henceforth be the standard setup.

It has been shown by Tsujimoto et al. (2011) that the calibration of the three
EPIC detectors are inconsistent. The error introduced by tying parameters be-
tween the EPIC detectors and XIS cameras, respectively, was studied by ﬁtting an
absorbed power law (phabs(powerlaw)) and comparing the best ﬁt normalizations
and photon indices. Variations between the cameras were observed but the error
introduced by tying the parameters was deemed to be small in comparison to other
errors.
It is also possible that the calibration ﬁles have undergone a signiﬁcant
improvement in recent years.

1legacy.gsfc.nasa.gov/caldb/data/rosat/pspc/cpf/matrices/directory

Chapter 5

Light curves

The light curves for the four XMM-Newton and four Suzaku observations (hence-
forth referred to as the recent observations) and the observed ﬂuxes and intrinsic
luminosities for all observations are presented in this chapter.
In addition, the
hardness ratio for the recent observations are plotted, providing superﬁcial insight
into spectral variability. The notes on spectral ﬁtting detailed in section 4.4 apply.
As mentioned in chapter 3, systematic errors are expected due to calibration
uncertainties (Ishida et al., 2011; Kettula et al., 2013; Tsujimoto et al., 2011). It
has been shown that Suzaku observes higher ﬂuxes than XMM-Newton, a trend
which is seen in this chapter, in particular in the 0.3–2 keV energy range. However,
no observations are simultaneous (although S3 and X3 almost overlap) and the
diﬀerences in ﬂux can be considered small compared to the variability on the given
timescales. The diﬀerences could therefore also be caused by intrinsic variations in
the source.

5.1 Short timescales

The light curves for the recent observations are shown in ﬁgure 5.1. The ROSAT
observation is excluded because it is too short to construct a light curve from.

Variability is observed on both short and long timescales. Short in this context
will henceforth mean ∼1 ks, i.e. a small fraction of an observation, whereas long
corresponds to timescales comparable to the time elapsed between observations or
longer. No systematic trends with time are seen. The largest variation in the
XMM-Newton observations on short timescales is a factor of ∼1.6 in X1, i.e. the
ratio of the maximum 1 ks bin to the minimum 1 ks bin within one observation.
The corresponding value for Suzaku is ∼3.0 in S4. However, it must be emphasized
that the statistical uncertainty of S4 is much larger than that of X1, as can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.1. RX J1633+4718 shows periods of slightly increased activity, such as
the latter parts of X3 and S3.

37

5.2. Long timescales

39

Two transitions between low ﬂux and high ﬂux states were chosen for ﬂux-
resolved spectral analysis, presented in section 6.3. The low/high state from the
ﬁrst/third XMM-Newton observation will henceforth be denoted X1L, X1H, X3L,
and X3H. These intervals are all 3 ks and were chosen based on duration and dif-
ference in ﬂux. The purpose was solely to analyze variability on short timescales
qualitatively since the data quality of 3 ks exposures is expected to be too low to
allow for detailed ﬁtting. There was therefore no rigorous selection criteria. In-
stead, the intervals were essentially chosen based on inspection of the light curve in
ﬁgure 5.1. It is worth mentioning that X3L and X3H are separated by a background
ﬂare lasting for roughly 4 ks. Background ﬂares were detected in all but the ﬁrst
XMM-Newton observation. These intervals are indicated with red bins and will be
excluded in the subsequent analysis.

5.2 Long timescales

5.2.1 Observed ﬂux

The observed ﬂuxes (Fo) for all nine observations in the soft (0.3–2 keV) and the
eight recent observations in the entire (0.3–10 keV) energy intervals are provided in
table 5.1 and plotted in ﬁgure 5.2. All values were obtained using the XSPEC model
cflux applied to an underlying model consisting of Galactic absorption, a broken
power law and a redshifted blackbody, i.e. cflux(phabs(bknpower+zbbody)). An
exception was made for R1, which was adequately described by a power law in place
of the broken power law. The primary purpose of these ﬁts was to determine the
observed ﬂux, hence the physical interpretation is irrelevant at this stage. Priority
was given to statistically good ﬁts that describe the observed data well. Each
observation was therefore ﬁtted individually.

No systematic trends with time are seen. The maximum variation is a factor of
∼1.4, i.e. the ratio of S3 to X4. It is clear that RX J1633+4718 displays variability
on long timescales. Both S3 and X3 are in a higher state compared to the other six
observations which are all on a fairly similar luminosity level.

The ROSAT ﬂux is naturally only calculated at soft energies due to the limited
energy range of the PSPC-B detector. Interestingly, the ﬂux measured by ROSAT
happens to be very close to the average of the recent observations. Note that the
R1 ﬂux is particularly close to the X2 ﬂux, which happens to be the observation
with the highest total net count.

5.2.2

Intrinsic luminosity

The calculated intrinsic luminosities (Li) are presented in table 5.1. These have
been calculated using the XSPEC task lumin. The intrinsic luminosity was cal-
culated by ﬁtting the favored partially absorbed model and then removing both

5.2. Long timescales

41

1012Fo

0.3–2 keV

1012Fo

0.3–10 keV

[erg cm−2 s−1]

[erg cm−2 s−1]

10−43Li
0.3–2 keV
[erg s−1]

10−43Li

0.3–10 keV
[erg s−1]

0.88+0.09
−0.08
1.09+0.06
−0.07
0.87 ± 0.01
1.05 ± 0.04
0.87 ± 0.01
1.13 ± 0.04
0.97 ± 0.01
0.94 ± 0.06
0.71+0.01
−0.02
0.76+0.03
−0.04
0.85 ± 0.03
0.93 ± 0.04
1.04+0.03
−0.04

2.34+0.08
−0.09
1.99 ± 0.04
2.21 ± 0.06
2.06 ± 0.04
2.71+0.06
−0.07
2.54 ± 0.05
1.96+0.07
−0.08
1.92 ± 0.06
1.72+0.11
−0.10
2.36 ± 0.12
2.15 ± 0.12
3.23 ± 0.15

7.9
8.0
7.1
8.9
7.1
9.1
7.4
7.6
6.2
6.4
7.0
7.0
7.7

12.5
11.1
13.2
11.3
15.0
13.1
11.3
10.3
9.7
12.0
11.9
15.2

Obs.

R1
S1
X1
S2
X2
S3
X3
S4
X4
X1L
X1H
X3L
X3H

Table 5.1: Observed ﬂux (Fo) and intrinsic luminosity (Li) in the soft and total
energy band. The energies for Fo are given in terms of observed energies, whereas
energies for Li are given in the source rest frame. No conﬁdence intervals are pre-
sented for the intrinsic Li because the XSPEC task used (lumin) does not support
error estimation.

42

Chapter 5. Light curves

absorption components. The model consists of Galactic absorption, intrinsic par-
tial covering, redshifted power law, and redshifted blackbody, i.e. phabs(zpcfabs(
zpowerlw+zbbody)). A detailed motivation for this model is presented in sec-
tion 6.1.

The variability in observed ﬂux and intrinsic luminosity are closely related be-
cause the absorption varies weakly across observations. It is worth mentioning that
the deﬁned energy ranges for Li is given in rest frame energies of the source, in
contrast to energy ranges for Fo, which are expressed in terms of observed energies.
This diﬀerence is relatively small for the source redshift of z = 0.116.

5.3 Hardness

A common way to search for spectral variability is to study the hardness as a
function of total count rate. The hardness is deﬁned as the ratio of the hard (2–
10 keV) to the soft (0.3–2 keV) count rate. Spectral variations are necessary but
not suﬃcient for a non-constant hardness. From this perspective, one can think of
the hardness as a two-bin spectrum.

The hardness plots are shown in ﬁgure 5.3. Clear systematic variations are
seen in terms of a harder-when-brighter trend, albeit X4 indicates more complex
behavior than a linear relation. It is worth pointing out that the trend seems to
hold on both short and long timescales. A consequence is that the time average
performed over each observation duration introduces an error, i.e. an average is
performed over diﬀerent spectral states. It should be safe to assume that this error
is small and a detailed study is deferred to section 6.3.

44

Chapter 6

Spectral analysis

In addition,
All spectral ﬁtting will follow the details presented in section 4.4.
it will be assumed that all data from the recent observations are used, omitting
R1, unless otherwise stated. This is done because a majority of the models are
unconstrainable using R1 data or outside of the energy range of ROSAT .

The outline of this chapter is as follows. Firstly, the spectra are studied and
an analysis is presented in section 6.1. Although not strictly required by the ob-
servations at hand, it is relevant to study potential reﬂection. This is presented in
section 6.2. Finally, section 6.3 is devoted to ﬂux-selected spectral analysis.

6.1 Models

6.1.1 Power law

The main spectral component in the relevant energy range is expected to be well
described by a power law. It is therefore natural to start by ﬁtting a power law
to each observation and study the spectra in terms of deviations from the power
law. Additionally, it is known that Galactic absorption is signiﬁcant. The current
model is thus phabs(zpowerlw) using XSPEC terminology. The redshifted power
law component zpowerlw has two free parameters, namely the photon index (Γ)
and a normalization constant (Cp). The normalization is deﬁned to be the number
of photons keV−1 cm−2 s−1 at 1 keV1.

The residuals of the ﬁt is shown in ﬁgure 6.1 and the ﬁt statistic is 3355/2356 =
1.42. Note that the diﬀerences in residuals between the diﬀerent cameras are ex-
pected since the residuals are given in units of standard deviations (σ), which is
instrument dependent. The advantage of a dynamic unit is that large ﬂuctuations
due to uncertainty are suppressed, for instance low signal-to-noise for the XIS cam-
eras at high energies.

1https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSmodelPowerlaw.html

45

h
t
i
w

h
c
a
e

e
h
T

,
4
.
6

46

d
e
2r
χ

b
b
C
4
0
1

]
0
21
c
p
k

9
3
g
r
e
[

T
B
k

]

V
e
[

2
4
.
1
=
6
5
3
2
/
5
5
3
3

3
0
.
1
=
7
0
4
1
/
0
5
4
1

4
3
.
1
=
8
4
3
2
/
0
5
1
3

6
0
.
1
=
0
4
3
2
/
1
7
4
2

4
0
.
1
=
4
2
3
2
/
0
2
4
2

4
0
.
1
=
8
3
3
2
/
4
3
4
2

5
0
.
1
=
8
4
3
2
/
5
5
4
2

6
0
.
1
=
6
5
3
2
/
6
8
4
2

0
0
3
–
0

8
7
0
.
0

5
.
3

0
.
3

7
9
–
1
2

0
8

1
3

1
3

Γ

2
8
.
1
–
7
5
.
1

4
1
.
2
–
3
7
.
1

0
9
.
1
–
0
6
.
1

2
3
.
2
–
1
9
.
1

3
2
.
2
–
8
7
.
1

7
2
.
2
–
8
7
.
1

1
3
.
2
–
4
8
.
1

6
2
.
2
–
8
9
.
1

i

N

0
2
−
0
1

]
2
−
m
c
[

c
p
f

c
p
N

0
2
−
0
1

]
2
−
m
c
[

)
w
o
p
z
(
a
h
p

†
)
w
o
p
z
(
a
h
p

l
e
d
o
M

7
7
–
0

1
7
.
0
–
6
4
.
0

3
7
.
0
–
4
4
.
0

1
7
.
0
–
0
5
.
0

1
7
.
0
–
0
4
.
0

0
6

0
1
1
–
0
7

0
9
–
0
3

0
0
1
–
0
4

0
1
1
–
0
6

0
0
1
–
0
6

)
)
b
b
z
+
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

)
)
b
b
z
+
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

‡
)
)
b
b
z
+
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

‡
)
)
b
b
z
+
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

)
)
w
o
p
z
(
s
b
a
h
p
z
(
a
h
p

)
)
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

d
e
n
n
a
p
s

e
g
n
a
r

e
h
t

e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n
I

.
s
l
e
d
o
m
y
d
o
b
k
c
a
l
b
d
n
a
w
a
l

r
e
w
o
p
d
e
b
r
o
s
b
a

l
l
a

r
o
f

s
e
u
l
a
v
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p
d
e
t
t
i
F

:
1
.
6

e
l
b
a
T

,
y
l
e
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

.
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n
i

e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ
n
o
c

t
o
n

.
e
.
i

,
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

d
e
i
t
n
u

t
f
e
l

e
r
e
w
t
a
h
t

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v

t
ﬁ

t
s
e
b

e
h
t

y
b

,
l
e
d
o
m
y
d
o
b
k
c
a
l
b

d
e
b
r
o
s
b
a

y
l
l
a
i
t
r
a
p

,
t
s
a
l

e
h
T

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

s
s
o
r
c
a

d
e
i
t

s
a
w
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

e
h
t

t
a
h
t

y
l
p
m

i

s
e
u
l
a
v

r
a
l
a
c
s

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

g
n
i
r
e
v
o
c

)
3
(

,
r
e
b
r
o
s
b
a
g
n
i
r
e
v
o
c

l
a
i
t
r
a
p
e
h
t

f
o
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
n
m
u
l
o
c

)
2
(

,
y
g
o
l
o
n
i
m
r
e
t
C
E
P
S
X
g
n
i
s
u
d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
e
d
o
M

)
1
(

:
s
n
m
u
l
o
C

,
x
e
d
n
i

n
o
t
o
h
p

)
5
(

,
n
o
i
t
p
r
o
s
b
a

c
i
s
n
i
r
t
n
i

g
n
i
r
e
v
o
c

y
l
e
t
e
l
p
m
o
c

f
o

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

n
m
u
l
o
c

)
4
(

,
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
g
n
i
r
e
v
o
c

l
a
i
t
r
a
p

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

.
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

t
ﬁ

)
8
(

,
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

y
d
o
b
k
c
a
l
b

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

)
7
(

,
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

y
d
o
b
k
c
a
l
b

e
h
t

f
o

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

)
6
(

.
)
V
e
k

0
1
–
2
(

l
a
v
r
e
t
n
i

d
r
a
h

e
h
t

o
t

t
ﬁ

y
l
n
O

.
1
R
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
I

†

‡

.
y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

,
3
.
6

d
n
a

,
2
.
6

s
e
l
b
a
t

n
i

d
e
d
i
v
o
r
p

e
r
a

s
l
e
d
o
m
o
w
t

t
s
a
l

e
h
t

d
n
a

)
)
w
o
p
z
(
f
c
p
z
(
a
h
p

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v

d
e
t
t
ﬁ

.
1
.
6

n
o
i
t
c
e
s

n
i

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

e
h
t

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

l
e
d
o
m
d
e
r
o
v
a
f

e
h
t

s
i

,
b
b
C

d
n
a

,

T
B
k

,
c
p
f

d
e
i
t

6.1. Models

47

5

0

5
−

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

0.5

1

2
Energy [keV]

5

Figure 6.1: Residuals of a power law component with Galactic absorption ﬁt to the
data from 0.3 to 10 keV. XMM-Newton data are blue and Suzaku data are green.
This is clearly a poor ﬁt with strong systematic residuals. Rebinning with a factor
of 10 has been made for clarity. Error bars are one standard deviation and energies
are given in the observed frame.

Fitted parameter values are provided in table 6.1, along with the best ﬁt values
of other models for comparison. The photon indices for the current, absorbed power
law model are within the interval 1.57–1.82. It is manifestly clear that a simple
power law model poorly describes the observed spectra.

The residuals in ﬁgure 6.1 are clearly systematic. In particular, the residuals
above 2 keV appear to be solely caused by an underestimation of Γ. Thus, it is
motivated to only ﬁt the power law, still with the free parameters untied across
observations, to data above 2 keV and extrapolating it to 0.3 keV. Residuals of this
ﬁt is shown in ﬁgure 6.2 and the ﬁtted parameter values are provided in table 6.1.
The power law ﬁts the hard energy range well and the photon indices are in the range
1.73–2.14. No systematic residuals can be seen and the χ2
red value is 1450/1423 =
1.03 (excluding the 0.3–2 keV range). It is worth emphasizing that no sign of an
iron line is observed around 6.4 keV. Further analysis of reﬂection will be presented
in section 6.2. Finally, note that a very prominent soft deﬁcit is evident at low
energies.

6.1.2 Absorption

The strong residuals at low energies in ﬁgure 6.2 indicate that intrinsic absorp-
tion by the host galaxy may be important. The most straightforward approach
is to add an additional intrinsic absorption component, making the current model
phabs(zphabs(zpowerlw)). The intrinsic absorption component zphabs has one
free parameter, speciﬁcally the column density (Ni), deﬁned analogously to the

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

48

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

0

0
2
−

0
4
−

0.5

1

2
Energy [keV]

5

Figure 6.2: Residuals of a power law component with Galactic absorption ﬁt to the
hard (2–10 keV) interval and extrapolated to 0.3 keV. XMM-Newton data are blue
and Suzaku data are green. A clear deﬁcit is seen below 2 keV. Rebinning with a
factor of 10 has been made for clarity. Error bars are one standard deviation and
energies are given in the observed frame.

Galactic column density (NG). The column density was allowed to vary between
observations. The ﬁt is poor and the residuals are shown in ﬁgure 6.3 and the ﬁtted
parameter values are given in table 6.1. The overall tendency is that although the
ﬂux drops below the power law extrapolation, it is far from totally extinct at very
low energies. The residuals of the absorbed and unabsorbed ﬁts are very similar as
can be seen by comparing ﬁgures 6.1 and 6.3.

Since the overall trend was that absorption results in over-extinction at very
low energies for any substantial, additional column density, it seems natural to try
partial absorption. The model is thus reﬁned by replacing the intrinsic absorp-
tion with partial absorption, resulting in the model phabs(zpcfabs(zpowerlw)).
Partial covering absorption has a free column density parameter (Npc), deﬁned
analogously to the aforementioned column densities. Furthermore, partial covering
introduces an additional free parameter, namely the partial covering fraction (fpc).
This is simply the fraction of the source obscured by the partial covering material.
The additional parameters are also allowed to vary freely across observations. The
residuals of the partially absorbed model are shown in ﬁgure 6.4. The ﬁt statistic
is 2471/2340 = 1.06 and no systematic deviations are seen. The best ﬁt photon
indices are in the range 1.91–2.32. All ﬁtted values of this model for individual
observations are provided in table 6.2. A summary of all ﬁts and ranges of relevant
best ﬁt values are summarized in table 6.1.

6.1. Models

49

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

5

0

5
−

0.5

1

2
Energy [keV]

5

Figure 6.3: Residuals of a model with intrinsic absorption. XMM-Newton data are
blue and Suzaku data are green. This model is clearly not able to describe the
observed data and the ﬁt statistic is 3150/2348 = 1.34 The residuals display similar
behavior to those seen in ﬁgure 6.1. The data have been rebinned with a factor of
10 for clarity. Error bars are one standard deviation and energies are given in the
observed frame.

0
1

5

0

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

0.2

0.5

1

2

5

Energy [keV]

Figure 6.4: Residuals of a model with partial intrinsic absorption. XMM-Newton
data are blue and Suzaku data are green. R1 data (red, encircled crosses) are
overlaid with residuals calculated using the ﬁt to X2.
It is clearly a good ﬁt to
red value of 2471/2340 = 1.06. A strong excess is
all recent observations with a χ2
evident at very low energies, discussed in section 6.1.3. The ﬁtted parameter values
are given in table 6.2. Recent data have been rebinned with a factor of 10 for clarity.
Error bars are one standard deviation and energies are given in the observed frame.

50

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

Obs.

Npc

[1020 cm−2]

S1
X1
S2
X2
S3
X3
S4
X4

71+22
−21
67 ± 7
95+20
−21
67+8
−7

109 ± 16
73 ± 8
85 ± 31
94+22
−20

fpc

Γ

0.58+0.08
−0.10
0.60 ± 0.04
0.64+0.07
−0.10
0.58 ± 0.04
0.71+0.05
−0.06
0.66+0.03
−0.04
0.51+0.11
−0.15
0.46+0.09
−0.11

2.15 ± 0.12
2.16 ± 0.06
2.32 ± 0.13
2.12 ± 0.06
2.27 ± 0.10
2.08 ± 0.06
2.13+0.15
−0.14
1.91 ± 0.10

Table 6.2: Fitted parameter values for the partially covered power law model in
red value for the ﬁt is 2471/2340 = 1.06. Error intervals
chronological order. The χ2
are 90 %.
Columns: (1) Observation, (2) column density of the partial covering absorber, (3)
covering fraction of the partial covering material, (4) photon index.

6.1.3 Blackbody emission

A remark is in order before going into the details of a possible blackbody. From
ﬁgure 6.4 it might seem that the data from R1 are inconsistent with the more
recent observations below 0.4 keV. However, recall that the energy resolutions of
XMM-Newton and Suzaku is signiﬁcantly better than that of ROSAT , which is
∼250 compared to ∼100 eV (FWHM) at the relevant energies. Thus, it is possible
for a very luminous component below 0.3 keV to prominently increase the observed
ﬂux at energies slightly above 0.3 keV in ROSAT spectra.

The R1 data in ﬁgure 6.4 clearly shows an excess at very low energies. To
take the excess into account, it was tested if an additional blackbody component
improves the ﬁt, as was found by Yuan et al. (2010). This can be done by simply
adding a redshifted blackbody component to the partially absorbed model, resulting
in the model phabs(zpcfabs(zpowerlw+zbbody)). The blackbody component has
the free parameters temperature (kBT ) and normalization (Cbb). The unit of Cbb
is erg39 kpc2
10, where erg39 and kpc10 denotes 1039 erg s−1 and 10 kpc, respectively2.
No free parameters were tied between observations at this stage.

Data from R1 is still excluded in this ﬁrst step because of the large diﬀerence in
time. The addition of the blackbody component improves the ﬁt to 2420/2324 =
1.04, i.e. ∆χ2 = −52 for 16 fewer degrees of freedom, for the recent data. However,
the best ﬁt normalization is varying by more than an order of magnitude and the
temperatures almost span a factor of ﬁve between individual observations, as can
It is therefore clear that each observation is incapable
be seen from table 6.1.

2https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSmodelBbody.html

6.1. Models

51

of constraining a potential blackbody since blackbody emission is expected to be
relatively constant given the small variations in observed ﬂux.

As a possible blackbody component is impossible to constrain using individual
observations, a natural option is to tie blackbody parameters between observations.
This introduces an error since the eight observations are non-simultaneous, but this
should be small in comparison to the statistical uncertainties. Both the blackbody
normalization and temperature were tied. Unreasonably large variations were ob-
tained if only one of the two was coupled, similar to when both parameters were
untied. Furthermore, if the emission is emitted by an accretion disk that is truly
varying, then changes in normalization and temperature are expected to be related.
So if one is tied, the other ought to remain largely constant.

−2.7 × 10−4 erg39 kpc2

The same blackbody model is therefore ﬁt with the modiﬁcation that all obser-
vations have both Cbb and kBT tied. The improvement when including a black-
body using this setup is ∆χ2 = −37 for two additional parameters, resulting in
2434/2338 = 1.04. The best ﬁt of the blackbody temperature is kBT = 80+12
−15 eV
with a normalization of 0.078+3.9
10. These values are also shown
in table 6.1. It is also interesting to note that the total blackbody luminosity is
∼2 × 1043 erg s−1. Firstly, this is not consistent with the ﬁt when R1 data is con-
sidered, as will be shown below. Secondly, both the temperature and luminosity
are inconsistent with theory, as will be seen in section 7.1. Lastly, the ﬁt is un-
reliable in the sense that it is more sensitive to errors in the spectra because only
a small fraction of the blackbody extends into the energy range of XMM-Newton
and Suzaku for the given temperature. The ﬁt is therefore rejected despite being
statistically acceptable.

It is possible to put more reliable constraints on a potential blackbody when
ROSAT data is included. Given that R1 seems to be consistent with the recent
observations above 0.3 keV, it is assumed that including R1 and tying its blackbody
parameters with those of the recent observations is reasonable. This is simply
to explore the scenario that the blackbody component is constant.
In addition,
the partial covering fraction is tied across observations, a restriction motivated in
section 6.1.4.

R1 data are unable to constrain Npc, Cp, and Γ, which are the remaining untied
parameters for each observation. The photon index was therefore frozen to 2.1,
which was chosen to be close to the average of the recent observations. Furthermore,
the blackbody is relatively insensitive to the other components because it dominates
at low energies, as seen in ﬁgure 6.6. In other words, even if the continuum besides
the blackbody is unreliable or weakly constrained at low energies, the error in the
magnitude of the blackbody would only be on the order of a few percent.

Residuals of the ﬁt and the unabsorbed model are shown in ﬁgures 6.5 and 6.6,
respectively. Model parameters for each observation are presented in table 6.3. The
best ﬁt blackbody temperature for this model is kBT = 31+2
−3 eV with a normal-
ization of 3.0+1.8
10. The corresponding blackbody luminosity is
∼7 × 1044 erg s−1, which is in the correct ballpark for an expected accretion disk,

−0.7 × 10−4 erg39 kpc2

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

52

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

2

0

2
−

0.2

0.5

1

2

5

Energy [keV]

Figure 6.5: Residuals of partially absorbed model with blackbody ﬁt including R1
(red, encircled crosses) with tied partial covering fraction. XMM-Newton data are
blue and Suzaku data are green. It is clearly a good ﬁt with a χ2
red value of 1.06.
It is interesting to make a comparison with ﬁgure 6.4; note the change between R1
and the recent observations around 0.4 keV. The ﬁtted parameter values are given
in table 6.3. Recent data have been rebinned with a factor of 10 for clarity. Error
bars are one standard deviation and energies are given in the observed frame.

in particular when the large uncertainties are taken into account. This will be
discussed further in section 7.1. Lastly, these blackbody parameters still give an
improvement of ∆χ2 = −5 for two fewer degrees of freedom when ﬁt to only the
recent data compared to the corresponding model without a blackbody. This im-
plies that the error introduced by tying R1 with recent data most likely is relatively
small.

Finally, it is relevant to determine the statistical signiﬁcance of the additional
blackbody component. One option is to compute the posterior predictive p-value
following Protassov et al. (2002). It should be mentioned that the ﬁrst step was
skipped, i.e. the simulated spectra were all samples of the best ﬁt power law, without
sampling of the best ﬁt parameters. This is not expected to qualitatively alter the
result.

Each ∆χ2 was obtained by ﬁrst simulating nine spectra from the best ﬁt partially
absorbed model without blackbody component, i.e. phabs(zpcfabs(zpowerlw)).
These spectra represent the nine observations and were made using the XSPEC
command fakeit. The task takes background, detector response, and exposure
time of the individual observations into account when generating the fake spectra.
The aforementioned partially absorbed model and the same model with a blackbody
component were then ﬁtted. The ∆χ2 value was obtained by subtracting the ﬁt
statistic of the model without blackbody component from that of the model with
a blackbody component. By comparing the distribution of simulated ∆χ2 values

6.1. Models

]
1
−

V
e
k
 
1
−
s
 
2
−

m
c
[
 

x
u
l
f
 
n
o
t
o
h
P
 
2

V
e
k

1
0

.

0

3
−
0
1
×
5

3
−
0
1
×
2

3
−
0
1

4
−
0
1
×
5

0.1

1

Energy [keV]

53

10

Figure 6.6: The unabsorbed model consisting of a blackbody (dotted red) and
power law (dashed blue) and the sum (solid black). The power law normalization
and photon index for this particular model are from the ﬁt to X2 and the other
parameters are coupled. The blackbody mainly contributes below 0.3 keV explain-
ing why it only was detected by ROSAT . Energies are given in the rest frame of
RX J1633+4718.

Obs.

Npc

[1020 cm−2]

R1
S1
X1
S2
X2
S3
X3
S4
X4

80+72
−60
71+20
−20
62+08
−08
89+20
−18
63+07
−07
94+17
−14
63+07
−08
93+26
−26
95+18
−16

Γ

2.10f

2.17+0.06
−0.07
2.15 ± 0.03
2.26+0.05
−0.06
2.12 ± 0.03
2.10 ± 0.04
1.98 ± 0.04
2.24+0.06
−0.07
2.05 ± 0.04

Cp

[10−4 keV−1 cm−2 s−1]

8.0+1.2
−2.8
7.9+0.8
−0.9
6.9 ± 0.3
8.7 ± 0.8
7.0 ± 0.3
9.4+0.7
−0.6
7.7 ± 0.4
7.3+0.7
−0.8
6.1 ± 0.3

−0.02, blackbody temperature kBT = 31+2

Table 6.3: Fitted parameter values for the favored, partially covered blackbody
model in chronological order. The values for the tied parameters are partial covering
fraction fpc = 0.60+0.02
−3 eV, and blackbody
normalization Cbb = 3.0+1.8
red value for the ﬁt is
2486/2356 = 1.06. Superscript f denotes that the parameter was frozen. Error
intervals are 90 %.
Columns: (1) Observation, (2) column density of the partial covering absorber, (3)
photon index, (4) power law normalization.

−0.7 × 10−4 erg39 kpc2

10. The χ2

6.1. Models

55

2

0

2
−

]
σ
[
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

0.2

0.5

1

2

5

Energy [keV]

Figure 6.8: Residuals of partially absorbed model with blackbody ﬁt including R1
(red, encircled crosses) with untied partial covering fraction. XMM-Newton data
are blue and Suzaku data are green. It is clearly a good ﬁt with a χ2
red value of
1.05. The ﬁtted parameter values are given in table 6.4. Recent data have been
rebinned with a factor of 10 for clarity. Error bars are one standard deviation and
energies are given in the observed frame.

2455/2348 = 1.05. Though signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations were observed, no variable pa-
rameters showed any obvious systematic dependence on time, as seen in table 6.4.

An important parameter in this context is ﬂux. No systematic ﬂux dependence
was found for Npc. A correlation was, however, found for fpc, plotted in ﬁgure 6.9.
A plot of Γ against Fo is also shown in ﬁgure 6.9. For later comparison, note that
the ratio between the largest and smallest Cp is ∼2.7, although the corresponding
value for Fo is ∼1.4.

A clear trend is seen for fpc, whereas Γ shows no obvious systematic variation
with ﬂux. It seems unnatural that fpc is correlated with Fo. In fact, fpc is expected
to be anticorrelated with Fo because an increased fpc implies increased absorption,
which in turn should result in a decreased observed ﬂux. Furthermore, note that
the x-axis is observed ﬂux, which could change even though the intrinsic luminosity
remains constant. However, the correlation seen for fpc would only be strengthened
if plotted against an intrinsic property as an increase of fpc results in lower observed
ﬂux. Choosing to plot against observed ﬂux is motivated because it is not possible
to calculate intrinsic luminosities without ﬁrst adopting a favored model, which has
not been done at this stage. Finally, as seen in the hardness plot (ﬁgure 5.3), the
spectra tend to become harder when brighter. Consequently, it is reasonable to
expect an anticorrelation between Γ and Fo.

Both of these issues are resolved if intrinsic variations in Γ are attributed to
changes in fpc when ﬁtting, i.e. that the two parameters are degenerate. In practice,

6.2. Reﬂection

57

this means that instead of ﬁtting harder spectra to higher ﬂux states, a power law
of similar slope with increased obscuration is ﬁt to match the increase in hardness.
It is therefore compelling to study the correlation between Γ and fpc, shown in
ﬁgure 6.10. A clear correlation is seen between fpc and Γ. This suggests that the
observed changes may be driven by the degeneracies of the ﬁt rather than being
physical.

The diﬀerence made by tying fpc between observations is an increase of ∆χ2 =
31 for eight additional degrees of freedom, resulting in a new χ2
red of 2486/2356 =
1.06. The residuals of this ﬁt are shown in ﬁgure 6.5 with the best ﬁt values given
in table 6.3. The ﬁt is still good, especially given that some variations in fpc are
expected, i.e. an additional small error is introduced. The aforementioned ﬁgure and
table can be compared with ﬁgure 6.8 and table 6.4, which are the corresponding
ﬁgure and table for the model with untied fpc.
It is evident that the model is
capable of describing the spectra regardless of fpc being tied or not. It is therefore
motivated to explore the case of fpc being tied between the observations.

Plots of the partial covering density Npc and Γ against Fo, respectively, are
shown in ﬁgure 6.11. No solid conclusion can be drawn for Npc, except that X4 is
statistically diﬀerent from the other XMM-Newton observations. The harder-when-
brighter trend is seen for Γ, particularly when considering data from XMM-Newton
and Suzaku separately and considering X4 an outlier.

In addition, the ratio between the largest and smallest Cp, which previously
was ∼2.7, is now ∼1.5, which is in agreement with the corresponding value for
Fo of ∼1.4. This is because the spectral variations previously were explained by
variable obscuration. To keep the observed ﬂux at the actually observed level, the
normalization had to counteract the decrease in ﬂux due to increased absorption.
In other words, this further supports tying fpc across observations.

In light of the analysis, the favored model is a partially absorbed model consist-
ing of a power law and blackbody with covering fraction and blackbody parameters
tied across the observations. This is not the statistically best model but several
arguments have been put forward to support the conclusion. A summary of all
models is provided in table 6.1 and the best ﬁt parameters for the favored model
are presented in table 6.3.

6.2 Reﬂection

Reﬂection has so far been neglected because no iron line was seen (e.g. ﬁgure 6.5)
and since other models ﬁt the observed spectra well. However, reﬂection is a com-
mon component of NLS1 spectra (Crummy et al., 2006; Fabian, 2016; Reynolds,
2016). It is therefore interesting to obtain limits to reﬂection.

One method of quantifying the lack of an iron line is to compute the 90 %
upper limit on the equivalent width W using the XSPEC task eqwidth and its
option err. This was done by ﬁtting a power law with an additional redshifted
Gaussian (zgauss) to the hard spectra (2–10 keV). It has been shown in ﬁgure 6.2

60

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

reﬂected spectrum. The model does not distinguish between power-law emission
from jets and coronas. The most notable features are that a rich set of emis-
sion lines and absorption at soft energies are obtained for low levels of ionization
(ξ < ∼200). Reﬂected spectra get increasingly similar to the incident power laws
for higher ionization levels.

The relline component computes the relativistic eﬀects on a reﬂected emission
line. This is strongly dependent on the black hole spin (a) since the ISCO gets
smaller for increasing a. Furthermore, the emissivity of the disk is assumed to
depend on distance from the black hole. This is modelled as r−ǫ, where r is radial
distance and ǫ is the emissivity index. The result of relativistic reﬂection is that
lines get broadened and obtain a red wing due to gravitational redshift.

The relxill model combines xillver and relline. It computes the relativis-
tically blurred reﬂection at each observed point of the accretion disk. This has to be
done because the convolution of the reﬂected spectra is dependent on radius. Fur-
thermore, it calculates observed spectra as a function of inclination (θ), in contrast
to previous models, which were angle-averaged. The geometry is described by the
reﬂection fraction (fr). It is deﬁned as the ratio of power law emission to reﬂected
emission at the origin of the radiation. Finally, the spatial extent of the accretion
disk is given by the inner radius (rin) and outer radius (rout) and the high-energy
roll-over of the power law is given by Ecut (the low-energy limit is eﬀectively set by
0.1 keV, below which the model is undeﬁned).

The underlying power law in the favored model from section 6.1.4 was replaced
by relxill, which results in the new model phabs(zpcfabs(relxill+zbbody)).
R1 data were used in the ﬁt to constrain the blackbody, however, this does not
aﬀect the reﬂection parameters signiﬁcantly. The partial covering absorption was
required for ﬁts to be acceptable. A power law is a special case of relxill, namely
when the reﬂection fraction fr is zero. Any ﬁts with relxill will thus be strictly
better, in χ2 sense. Both partial absorption parameters Npc and fpc have to be
coupled across observations due to poor constraints when ﬁtting. Many of the
reﬂection parameters also had to be frozen for the same reason, speciﬁcally: ǫ = 3,
a = 0.998, θ = 10◦, rin = rISCO, rout = 400 gravitational radii, AFe = 1, and
Ecut = 300 keV. All values are their respective defaults except for the inclination
which was set to 10◦ (instead of its default value of 30◦) because NLS1s are assumed
to be viewed face-on (Berton et al., 2016).

This leaves the photon index, ionization, reﬂection fraction, and normalization
(Cr) free and decoupled. These four parameters are still only loosely constrained as
can be seen in the ∆χ2 contour plots of fr and ξ in ﬁgure 6.12. The corresponding
plots for the six remaining observations are included in appendix A. The ﬁt statistic
was 2456/2349 = 1.05 and the photon indices from all observations were within the
range 1.94–2.30. Contours for diﬀerent observations vary unsystematically, which
indicates that the ﬁtted values might be unstable, i.e. sensitive to small ﬂuctuations.
It is therefore diﬃcult to draw any quantitative conclusions. However, it is evident
from the plots that the combination high reﬂection fraction and low ionization is
unacceptable for all observations. This indicates that it is a relatively robust feature

6.3. Flux-selected spectra

61

for all spectra, despite the large ﬂuctuations. In other words, any signiﬁcant amount
of reﬂection must come from highly ionized material.

It is interesting to study variability from a disk reﬂection perspective. The
additional level of detail of the model could potentially shed light on which under-
lying components that are varying. In addition, it has been suggested that X-ray
variability in NLS1s can be explained by a constant reﬂection component in con-
junction with a power law of constant slope and varying normalization (e.g. Fabian
and Vaughan, 2003; Ponti et al., 2006; Zoghbi et al., 2010).

Leaving parameters free was not an option due to the data being unable to
constrain the parameters. It was, however, possible to test if a ﬁt with constant Γ
was reasonable, i.e. if it is possible to ﬁt a model with tied photon indices. This
is to test if a scenario where a combination of only the normalization, ionization,
and reﬂection fraction are capable of matching the observed variability. The change
in ﬁt statistic was ∆χ2 = 36 for eight additional degrees of freedom, resulting in
2492/2353 = 1.06. This is interpreted as a decent ﬁt, given that tying the photon
indices is a rather strong restriction. The conclusion is thus that it is not possible
to rule out the scenario where the observed spectra are described by a power law of
(nearly) constant slope. The spectral variability in this picture is attributed solely
to changes in level of ionization and reﬂection fraction.

6.3 Flux-selected spectra

Variations have so far only been studied on long timescales, i.e. across observations.
However, the hardness plots 5.3 clearly indicate spectral variations on long as well
as short timescales. Additionally, both variations appear to depend on ﬂux. Four
time intervals (two ﬂux transitions) were therefore chosen for ﬂux-selected spectral
analysis, described in section 5.1 and shown in ﬁgure 5.1.

The spectrum from each time interval is shown in ﬁgure 6.13. Since the black-
body is unconstrainable using only XMM-Newton data and the partially absorbed
power law model is a good ﬁt without R1, the blackbody component was omit-
ted. Best ﬁt values are presented in table 6.5. The partial covering parameters
were coupled over the transitions. It was veriﬁed that no statistically signiﬁcant
improvement was obtained by decoupling them and the parameters are also not
expected to vary signiﬁcantly on short timescales.

A weak harder-when-brighter trend can be seen in Γ, although it should be em-
phasized that the conﬁdence intervals are slightly overlapping for both transitions.
This means that the short term variations can be described by a pivoting power
law component. However, note that the only untied parameter that changes the
shape of the spectrum is Γ. It is therefore not possible to rule out other causes for
the variation using this simple model.

It is also clear from ﬁgure 6.13 that the variations are primarily driven by an
increase of the contribution at high energies with a relatively stable soft component.
This can be compared to the variations of observed ﬂux on long timescales, which

6.3. Flux-selected spectra

63

Obs.

X1L
X1H
X3L
X3H

Npc

[1020 cm−2]

fpc

Γ

Cp

[10−4 keV−1 cm−2 s−1]

70+20
−20

70+10
−10

0.52+0.09
−0.12

0.63+0.06
−0.07

2.09+0.13
−0.13
1.93+0.12
−0.12
2.08+0.11
−0.11
1.89+0.10
−0.10

5.4+0.8
−1.0
6.4+1.1
−0.9
7.7+1.1
−1.0
8.7+1.3
−1.1

Table 6.5: Fitted parameter values for the ﬂux selected spectra. The partial cover-
ing parameters were coupled over respective transition since no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
was detected. Error intervals are 90 %.
Columns: (1) Observation, (2) column density of the partial covering absorber, (3)
covering fraction of the partial covering material, (4) photon index, (5) power law
normalization.

generally also show a harder-when-brighter trend as seen in the hardness plots
(ﬁgure 5.3). However, it is clear that both the soft and the hard contribution varies
on long timescales, as can be seen in table 5.1. So, the variability on long timescales
is in line with that on short timescales with additional complexity. This is especially
evident when comparing X4 to the other observations.

64

]
1
−

V
e
k
 
1
−
s
[
 
s
t
n
u
o
c
 
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

]
1
−

V
e
k
 
1
−
s
[
 
s
t
n
u
o
c
 
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

1
.
0

1
0
.
0

1
.
0

1
0
.
0

Chapter 6. Spectral analysis

0.5

1

2

Energy [keV]

0.5

1

2

Energy [keV]

5

5

Figure 6.13: The low (green) and high (blue) ﬂux spectra from X1 (upper) and X3
(lower). The three spectra from each observation are from pn, MOS1 and MOS2.
Note that the diﬀerence between low and high states increases with energy, with
almost no variations at the low limit. Error bars are one standard deviation and
energies are given in the observed frame.

Chapter 7

Discussion

The results in chapter 5 show that RX J1633+4718 varies only moderately during
the observations. Short timescale variations are generally smaller than a factor of
two, and the variations on long timescales are of even smaller magnitude. It is also
clear that the observed spectra get harder during high ﬂux intervals. This trend is
seen on both short and long timescales. However, long timescales also display more
complex behavior.

It was

furthermore shown in chapter 6 that

the observed spectra of
RX J1633+4718 favors a model consisting of a power law and an additional black-
body component that are both partially absorbed. An iron Kα line is not observed
in any spectrum, indicating that reﬂection characteristics are weak. The variability
on short timescales is primarily driven by an increased contribution at high en-
ergies with a relatively constant soft component. A hardening of the power law
component is a possible explanation. Although, other options cannot be ruled out.
A discussion on the blackbody emission and the soft excess is provided in sec-
tion 7.1. Emphasis is put on how the observed excess relates to that observed
in other sources and comparing the ﬁtted blackbody with standard disk theory.
This is followed by a discussion on reﬂection in section 7.2 and variability in sec-
tion 7.3. It is then possible to draw some conclusion that constrain the geometry
of RX J1633+4718, which is done in section 7.4. RX J1633+4718 is compared
with other AGNs in section 7.5. Finally, a discussion on future work is given in
section 7.6.

7.1 Blackbody and soft X-rays

Firstly, a clariﬁcation is in order. The term “soft excess” is frequently used to
describe the surplus above a power law in the range 0.3–2 keV when extrapolating
the ﬁt from the 2-10 keV energy range. It is important to distinguish this 0.3–2 keV
component from the spectrum below 0.3 keV since very diﬀerent behavior can be

65

66

Chapter 7. Discussion

observed in these energy intervals. The term soft will continue to be used to refer
to 0.3–2 keV whereas the low ROSAT energies 0.1–0.3 keV will be stated clearly.

At ﬁrst glance it might seem like the 0.1–0.3 keV interval is relatively small.
However, it still spans a factor of three in energy, or alternatively, blackbody tem-
perature kBT . When translated to black hole mass M, this corresponds to almost
two orders of magnitude for a ﬁxed accretion rate because of the kBT ∝ M −1/4 ˙M 1/4
dependence from equation (2.19). For a black hole accreting at the Eddington limit,
a temperature of 0.03 keV (which is most prominent in the 0.1–0.3 keV range as
seen in ﬁgure 6.6) gives a mass of 2×106 M⊙. Hence, it is clear that a large portion
of the (low mass) AGN population could have blackbodies visible in the 0.1–0.3 keV
range.

The blackbody temperatures found in literature are commonly within a nar-
row range 0.1–0.2 keV, independent of mass (Crummy et al., 2006; Gierliński and
Done, 2004; Vaughan et al., 1999), which is inconsistent with the standard disk
theory (Shakura and Sunyaev, 1973). This have led to the development of other
models for the soft excess based on absorption (Chevallier et al., 2006; Tombesi
et al., 2010; Turner and Miller, 2009), upscattering of low-energy blackbody pho-
tons (Done et al., 2012), and reﬂection (García et al., 2014; Ross and Fabian, 2005),
which have shown varying levels of success in describing observed spectra. Black-
body contribution is therefore generally considered to be of little importance in
explaining the observed spectra. However, it is important to note that these results
rely on data above 0.3 keV because no modern instruments, such as XMM-Newton
and Suzaku, have an energy range that extends to lower energies.

It might thus seem peculiar that RX J1633+4718 would require a blackbody
component at a high signiﬁcance level, which also results in best ﬁt parameters
far outside of the ordinarily observed ranges. Note that emphasis was put on the
distinction between soft energies and the 0.1–0.3 keV range. Almost all models
studied in recent literature have exclusively been ﬁtted to data above 0.3 keV since
no current instrument oﬀers high quality spectroscopic capabilities at lower X-ray
energies. So, the extreme values obtained for RX J1633+4718 are possibly just
a natural consequence of using ROSAT data, which was necessary to constrain
the blackbody component.
In fact, RX J1633+4718 is not unique when put in
context with other ROSAT studies, many of which ﬁnd blackbody temperatures
below 100 eV (e.g. Fink et al., 1997; Gondhalekar et al., 1994; Pounds et al., 1995,
1994; Puchnarewicz et al., 1995). However, these relatively old studies suﬀer from
lack of knowledge that is now available, for instance based on high quality data at
harder energies, which allows for more solid conclusions to be drawn. It has also
been shown that extremely steep spectra below 0.3 keV is a very robust feature
among NLS1s (Boller et al., 1996), whereas quasars have harder corresponding
spectra (Laor et al., 1997). A tentative conclusion is thus that NLS1s which are
less massive have an underlying blackbody contribution that might be more or less
dominant around 0.2 keV, while quasar blackbodies fall outside of ROSAT ’s energy
range since they are more massive. Lastly, it is worth mentioning that certain

7.1. Blackbody and soft X-rays

67

objects with extremely low mass have been adequately modeled by blackbodies
above 0.3 keV (e.g. Boller et al., 2001; Zoghbi et al., 2010).

An explanation is still in order for the apparent deﬁcit at soft energies, in con-
trast to the frequently mentioned excess (e.g. Crummy et al., 2006). Even though
excess is more common, absorption is still seen in other sources. The survey of
NLS1s by Leighly (1999, her ﬁgure 1) present numerous soft X-ray spectra, several
of which show diﬀerent levels of lack of soft excess. RX J1633+4718 can also be
compared to other RLNLS1s in the surveys by Foschini et al. (2015, their table 5),
where its photon indices appear relatively unique.
It seems reasonable that the
main reason why RX J1633+4718 shows a soft deﬁcit is because of partial absorp-
tion. However, this does not explain why the blackbody remains very prominent,
i.e. the ratio of 0.1–0.3 to 0.3–2 keV ﬂux seems larger than for other sources. So,
a possibility is that the intrinsic soft excess is weak in addition to being absorbed.
This is also in line with the reﬂection origin of soft excess, which was shown to only
contribute weakly to the spectrum of RX J1633+4718.

As mentioned in the introduction, the X-ray spectrum in RX J1633+4718 has
previously been studied by Yuan et al. (2010), who reported a blackbody tempera-
ture of 32.5+8.0
−6.0 eV using only ROSAT data. Furthermore, Mallick et al. (2016) used
the four XMM-Newton observations and obtained a temperature of 39.6+11.2
−5.5 eV.
These values can be compared with the 31+2
−3 eV presented here, which was ob-
tained when ﬁtting to all available data from XMM-Newton, Suzaku and ROSAT .
It was shown in section 6.1.3 that the ROSAT data were consistent with the recent
observations, meaning that the same model can be used to describe all observed
spectra.

The apparent discrepancy between the estimated temperatures is not surprising
when diﬀerences in methods and models are taken into account. Mass estimates
based on optical data have been reported in the literature and all estimates are in the
range 2–8×106 M⊙ (Foschini et al., 2015; Järvelä et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2012; Yuan
et al., 2008) with an arithmetic mean close to 4×106 M⊙, which will henceforth be
taken as the mass (M) of the SMBH in RX J1633+4718. This corresponds to an
Eddington limit of 5 × 1044 erg s−1. The total thermal luminosity (excluding any
jet contribution) of RX J1633+4718 can be estimated to be ∼3 × 1044 erg s−1 using
optical data and relations for radio-quiet AGNs (Greene and Ho, 2005; Richards
et al., 2006; Yuan et al., 2010). An independent method of obtaining an accretion
disk temperature can now be made using solely optical data and equation (2.19),
which gives kBT = 21 eV for the values above. This is not within the range of
the value 31+2
−3 eV, however, uncertainties in the optical estimates are practically
unknown and error bars of the best ﬁt value do not consider any errors besides
statistical uncertainty. A detailed discussion of possible errors is deferred to the
end of this section.

A problem with the estimate presented above is that the optical luminosity was
signiﬁcantly lower than the luminosity of solely the best ﬁt blackbody, which had a
luminosity of 7×1044 erg s−1. Another luminosity estimate is to simply use the sum

68

Chapter 7. Discussion

of the best ﬁt blackbody and the contribution of the power law within the energy
range 0.3–10 keV. This is a conservative lower limit on the bolometric luminosity
given the picture presented in section 6.1. Note that the mass is still taken to be the
optical estimate and the temperature and normalization parameters in the zbbody
model are not directly connected, i.e. this is not circular reasoning. The average
luminosity using the outlined method is L = 8 × 1044 erg s−1, corresponding to
an accretion rate of 1.7 times the Eddington limit. These are henceforth taken
to be the best estimates. A blackbody temperature can now be calculated using
equation 2.19, giving kBT = 29 eV, in excellent agreement with the best ﬁt values.
It is worth mentioning that Yuan et al. (2010) and Mallick et al. (2016) found
blackbody luminosities of 3.5 × 1044 erg s−1 and 1.51 × 1044 erg s−1, respectively.
However, the former did not take absorption into account and the latter only used
XMM-Newton and thus obtained a lower luminosity, a trend also seen in section 6.1.
Note that the super-Eddington accretion rate is relatively high, but sensitive to
errors in mass estimates. For example, if the mass of Foschini et al. (2015) is used
(i.e. 7.9×106 M⊙), an accretion rate of 0.8 is obtained. Furthermore, a recent study
has shown that the masses of NLS1s might be systematically underestimated (Baldi
et al., 2016). An argument can be made that the observed blackbody temperature
shows that the mass estimate of RX J1633+4718 is (approximately) correct. How-
ever, it is possible that a more massive black hole would appear to have a higher
temperature, for example because of a high black hole spin (Middleton, 2016) or
spectral hardening (Done et al., 2012). Finally, it is worth noting that NLS1s are
expected to have high accretion rates (Collin and Kawaguchi, 2004; Foschini et al.,
2015), so the estimated accretion rate of 1.7 times the Eddington rate should not
be considered extreme.

Another question worth investigating is if the area of the blackbody is consis-
tent with the size of an accretion disk. Assume the accretion disk to be a two-sided
annulus with inner radius equivalent to the innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO).
The measured and estimated quantities then gives an outer radius of 3.2 ISCO.
The corresponding value for a standard Shakura-Sunyaev thin disk is 3.6. These
two values are considered to be in good agreement considering the underlying sim-
pliﬁcations.

It is clear that a blackbody is required in addition to an underlying, absorbed
power law and the best ﬁt values are consistent with standard disk theory. How-
ever, several crucial assumptions have been made. Firstly, the need of a blackbody
was based on the statistical rejection of a pure power law continuum, implying
that these were the only options available. It is therefore of interest to study other
components, in place of the blackbody component, that are able to ﬁt the data.
Only two reasonable components were statistically acceptable due to the extreme
steepness observed by ROSAT , namely Raymond-Smith thin plasma (Raymond
and Smith, 1977) and thermal bremsstrahlung (Karzas and Latter, 1961; Kellogg
et al., 1975), both originally discussed by Yuan et al. (2010). However, both mod-
els describe scenarios where the source gas would have to be optically thick, given
basic assumptions about properties of RX J1633+4718. This, in conjunction with

7.2. Reﬂection

69

the fact that an accretion disk is predicted by theory, give solid reason to adopt
the blackbody model. Secondly, it has been assumed that the black hole is non-
rotating (except when studying reﬂection), primarily aﬀecting the relations between
temperature, mass, and accretion rate. It was unsuccessfully attempted to ﬁt more
sophisticated blackbody models, particularly Kerr blackbody (Li et al., 2005), which
takes numerous other eﬀects into account as well, such as inclination and emission
due to torque at the inner boundary of the accretion disk. Lastly, another eﬀect
which signiﬁcantly aﬀects the predicted parameters of interest is potential spec-
tral hardening1. The importance of spectral hardening for AGNs is not entirely
settled (Davis et al., 2006; Done et al., 2012; Jin et al., 2012; Pal et al., 2016).
Spectral hardening is eﬀectively upscattering of softer photons, which distorts the
spectral shape and signiﬁcantly aﬀects the ﬁtted parameter values.

7.2 Reﬂection

The ﬁrst sign that any disk reﬂection in this source might be weak is the lack of an
iron line around 6.4 keV. It is established that the eﬀective width of the iron line
decreases with increasing hard X-ray luminosity, an eﬀect known as the Iwasawa-
Taniguchi eﬀect (Iwasawa and Taniguchi, 1993), sometimes called X-ray Baldwin
eﬀect after the analogous eﬀect in optical (Baldwin, 1977). The equivalent width
upper limit of 100 eV and average hard X-ray luminosity of ∼5 × 1043 erg s−1
puts RX J1633+4718 among the reﬂection-weak sources (e.g. Bianchi et al., 2007;
Iwasawa and Taniguchi, 1993; Jiang et al., 2006), in particular when considering
that the best ﬁt values are signiﬁcantly lower than 100 eV.

There are primarily two explanations for the lack of disk reﬂection, essentially
shown in the contour plots of fr and ξ (ﬁgure A.1). Firstly, the geometry could be
such that no reﬂection occurs or reaches the observer, i.e. small reﬂection fraction fr.
This could be caused by relativistic beaming of the upscattered radiation towards
the observer and away from the disk. Alternatively, the reﬂecting gas could be
highly ionized, resulting in the reﬂected spectrum being very similar to a power
law. Note that this implies potentially large amounts of reﬂection, but without
many of the characteristic reﬂection features.

One pitfall concerning disk reﬂection is the measure of the amount of reﬂected
radiation. Both reﬂection fraction and reﬂection strength are used in literature and
a clariﬁcation on this topic has been made by Dauser et al. (2016). Further com-
plications arise because of a bug in versions of relxill earlier than 0.4a (released
on January 18, 2016) rendering some earlier values of fr unreliable2.

The reﬂection fraction used by relxill is the ratio of reﬂected ﬂux over primary
ﬂux. Thus, the parameter ranges 0–1 and 1–∞ of fr are comparable. The only
conclusion that can be drawn from the contour plots of fr and ξ (ﬁgure A.1) is

1Also referred to as Comptonization, upscattering, eﬀective temperature, or color correction.
2http://www.sternwarte.uni-erlangen.de/~dauser/research/relxill/index.html

70

Chapter 7. Discussion

therefore that solely the primary continuum is visible unless the reﬂecting material
is highly ionized, in which case the reﬂection geometry is fully unconstrained.

7.3 Origin of variability

Before looking into the details of variability in RX J1633+4718, a remark is in order
regarding the blackbody component. Some changes in blackbody temperature due
to variability of accretion rate are expected because of the temperature-accretion
rate relation, i.e. equation (2.19). However, the blackbody component had to be
coupled between the observations, and ROSAT data is furthermore of too low
quality to pin down the small variations. This eﬀect has only been observed using
XMM-Newton (e.g. in Mrk 766, Boller et al., 2001). Variability will therefore only
be discussed in the 0.3–10 keV range. It must be emphasized that this assumption
has very important consequences. In fact, all reported variability may be attributed
to redistribution of emission between the blackbody and the harder components,
i.e. implying constant intrinsic luminosity or equivalently, accretion rate. The 0.1–
0.3 keV luminosity is almost a factor of ten larger than that in the 0.3–10 keV
interval, so if only a few percent of the blackbody emission is reprocessed, a very
signiﬁcant change will be observed.

Both short and long timescale variability are seen in the hardness plots (ﬁg-
ure 5.3). The plots also clearly indicate that ﬂux generally is the main driver
behind spectral variability. Flux dependence is not surprising since it is closely
related to Eddington ratio and it has been clearly shown that Eddington ratio is
of utter importance to AGNs (Boroson, 2002; Boroson and Green, 1992; Shen and
Ho, 2014). The observed harder-when-brighter trend (on short timescales) typi-
cally implies dominant jet contribution, which is commonly seen in blazars (Abdo
et al., 2010; D’Ammando et al., 2011; Kataoka et al., 2008). Theoretical studies
of Compton-cooled disk coronas predict ﬂux-driven variations of hardness, but the
exact relation is complex and depends on several parameters (Haardt et al., 1997).

7.3.1 Short timescales

The origins of short and long timescale variability will be treated separately since
the underlying processes might diﬀer. Flux-selected spectral analysis was attempted
to investigate short-term variability. The selected spectra are shown in ﬁgure 6.13.
It is clearly seen from the ﬁgure that the diﬀerence is mainly driven by an increase
of the hard contribution whereas the soft ﬂux is relatively constant. This is fur-
ther supported by the root mean square (RMS) spectrum for RX J1633+4718 in
Mallick et al. (2016, their ﬁgure 7), which shows a correlation between variability
and energy. The constant soft component and variable hard component rules out
changes in absorption as the source of short timescale variability. If absorption was
the main driver, the expected outcome would be variations at soft energies with a
relatively constant hard component.

7.3. Origin of variability

71

At ﬁrst glance, it seems like the most natural explanation would be a variable
power-law component that is pivoting around soft energies. This would correspond
to changes in the underlying source of the power law, i.e. a corona or, more likely,
a (base of a) jet.
Indeed, it was shown that the observed variability on short
timescales can be ascribed to variations in Γ.

7.3.2 Long timescales

Characteristics on short timescales were also observed on long timescales, meaning
that all arguments apply equally well. However, deviations from the aforementioned
trends were found for one observations, namely X4. This indicates that the complete
picture has to be more complicated when long timescales are considered.

No clear signs of increased absorption were detected during X4. It was shown
in ﬁgure 6.9 that X4 was ﬁtted with the lowest covering fraction with a statistically
insigniﬁcant increase in column density when both partial covering parameters were
untied. Therefore, it seems like the observed changes in RX J1633+4718 are intrinsic
and more complicated than simply originating from changes in one parameter that
is proportional to luminosity.

A possible explanation for the variability is that the unobscured continuum
would exhibit an excess caused by constant disk reﬂection that dominates at soft
energies. Variability would then primarily be caused by changes in the normaliza-
tion of a power law component of constant slope, which would cause an apparent
change in hardness. Arguments very similar to the one above have been successfully
applied to some sources (e.g. Fabian and Vaughan, 2003; Ponti et al., 2006; Zoghbi
et al., 2010), and found to be inadequate in other cases (e.g. Taylor et al., 2003).
It is worth mentioning that light bending has been invoked to motivate constant
reﬂection with variable direct continuum (Martocchia et al., 2000; Miniutti and
Fabian, 2004).

This was tested on long timescales in section 6.2 and it was shown that the
observed variability on long timescales can be described by changes in the normal-
ization, ionization, and reﬂection fraction exclusively. It was not possible to study
the variability of the parameter values because both the reﬂection fraction and ion-
ization were varying unsystematically. The only trend was that a combination of
a high reﬂection fraction and low level of ionization was disfavored. However, this
was also the case when Γ was untied, as shown in the plots of fr and ξ in ﬁgure A.1.
Therefore, it is only possible to draw the conclusion that this scenario is possible,
without excluding other options. It should be noted that the argument applies to
short timescales as well. Although, since the ﬁt was diﬃcult to constrain using all
data, it was not attempted to use only the short, ﬂux-selected spectra.

7.5. RX J1633+4718 compared to other AGNs

73

data is inconclusive. This is further supported by the properties of NLS1s being
consistent with a face-on view of the accretion disk (Berton et al., 2016). Note that
the X-ray spectra of RX J1633+4718 were harder when brighter, which is in line
with the view that jet launching AGNs are harder when brighter, and conversely
for AGNs without jets (Abdo et al., 2010; D’Ammando et al., 2011; Kataoka et al.,
2008).

Disk reﬂection either require a low reﬂection fraction or highly ionized reﬂection
medium. A low reﬂection fraction could possibly be explained by the jet emission
being relativistically beamed away from the disk. Beaming is supported by jet-
dominated AGNs often showing weaker soft excesses, but there are exceptions to
this trend (e.g. D’Ammando et al., 2014). Lastly, it should be noted that high
ionization levels (ξ∼1000) have previously been reported for other RLNLS1s (e.g.
Ghosh et al., 2016).

Little can be deduced about a potential corona in RX J1633+4718. If there is
a corona, then reﬂection certainly would be expected and the reﬂecting medium
would then have to be ionized. The distinction between base of jets and coronas is
also not clear, i.e. there might be a corona which essentially is just the base of the
jet.

7.5 RX J1633+4718 compared to other AGNs

The photon indices of the favored model are within the range 1.98–2.26, as seen
in table 6.1. These values can be compared to those of other RLNLS1s in the
survey by Foschini et al. (2015, their ﬁgure 2). It is clear that RX J1633+4718 is
close to the average among RLNLS1s. This happens to be harder than most of the
radio-quiet NLS1s (Foschini et al., 2015; Grupe et al., 2010) and a bit softer than
many FSRQs (Donato et al., 2001; Foschini et al., 2015). Hard photon indices are
normally interpreted as an additional indication of jet emission.

Furthermore, the harder-when-brighter trend is typically observed in jet-
emitting AGNs (Abdo et al., 2010; D’Ammando et al., 2011; Kataoka et al., 2008)
whereas AGNs that are not launching jets display the opposite trend (e.g. Lamer
et al., 2003). Additionally, the harder-when-brighter trend is also observed in X-ray
binaries when in their high state (e.g. Wu and Gu, 2008).

Weak reﬂection signatures are also common for jet-dominated AGNs (D’Amm-
ando et al., 2014; Kataoka et al., 2008). This is could be because of relativistic
beaming by the jet resulting in a majority of the radiation being directed away
from the disk. Although, another explanation is that the reﬂecting material is
highly ionized, which has been seen in other sources (e.g. D’Ammando et al., 2014;
Ghosh et al., 2016). Reﬂection fractions cannot be compared since it was incorrectly
computed prior to January 18, 2016 due to a bug in relxill3.

The lack of soft excess is frequently observed in jet-launching AGNs, although,
there are some exceptions where a soft excess is observed (D’Ammando et al., 2014;

3http://www.sternwarte.uni-erlangen.de/~dauser/research/relxill/index.html

74

Chapter 7. Discussion

Ghosh et al., 2016; Kataoka et al., 2008). However, partial absorption was clearly
necessary to describe the observed spectra of RX J1633+4718. This is in contrast
with the RLNLS1s that are γ-ray-emitting (D’Ammando et al., 2012, 2015; D’
Ammando et al., 2014; Kataoka et al., 2008). Hence, it is possible that the lack of
soft excess in RX J1633+4718 might be due to absorption whereas other sources
lack an excess intrinsically.

Whether or not the blackbody emission is unique to RX J1633+4718 is a diﬃcult
question to answer using only available literature. The most probably explanation
is that the apparent uniqueness is because ROSAT data are used. A study of
archival ROSAT data with modern observations will likely be able to settle this
issue. Regardless of its origin, the excess in RX J1633+4718 detected by ROSAT
fails to be adequately described by models without a blackbody component.
In
other words, some rare explanation must be invoked.

7.6 Future work

More detailed spectral ﬁtting and spectral variability analysis of RX J1633+4718
can be performed if data quality allows. The ﬂux-resolved spectral analysis is just
the ﬁrst step of time resolved spectral analysis. Further studies could investigate
if the short term variability changes on long timescale, perhaps shedding some
light on why X4 appears diﬀerent. Absorption was just modeled using the most
simple model, other possibilities include ionized absorption and absorption lines
and edges (Turner and Miller, 2009). This could potentially reveal details about the
absorbing material and the broad line region. Careful timing studies has proven to
be a powerful method, which is capable of revealing disk reﬂection characteristics
through lag signatures (e.g. Zoghbi et al., 2010). A suitable aim for future X-
ray studies of RX J1633+4718 are closer scrutiny of the (lack of) soft excess and
absorption, i.e. trying to determine the intrinsic strength of the soft excess. This
is connected to the amount of reﬂection in the source, which in turn is related to
the geometry and the underlying physical processes. Data above 10 keV could also
help constrain reﬂection properties. Lastly, it is worth mentioning that the very
prominent blackbody emission could allow for spin estimation if higher quality data
is obtained below 0.3 keV.

Further study of accretion disks are necessary to fully understand the emission
below 0.3 keV and solidify the current blackbody model. One of the main questions
is why few blackbodies consistent with theory have been observed. The answer
is probably a combination of blackbody masses and energy ranges of available in-
struments. A careful study of supermassive black holes with extremely low mass
could oﬀer new insights because the disk contribution would then become visible
above 0.3 keV, where the current instruments have signiﬁcantly higher spectroscopic
capabilities. An alternative would be to systematically analyze archival data avail-
able below 0.3 keV, e.g. ROSAT observations. Although each individual spectrum
might be insuﬃcient for convincing conclusions, it might still be possible to survey

7.6. Future work

75

a large sample. Modern observations could be ﬁt simultaneously to help constrain
models, analogous to this work. Though, variability might be an issue. It is worth
emphasizing that once accurate measurements of disk emission can be performed
reliably, it oﬀers an independent method of mass or spin estimation.

76

Chapter 8

Summary and conclusions

An active galactic nucleus (AGN) is powered by accretion onto a supermassive
black hole. They have been actively researched for a long time but several ques-
tions still remain unanswered. The accretion disk of infalling matter is expected
to show a blackbody signature in soft X-rays and extreme ultraviolet, but obser-
vational evidence is relatively weak. This is further complicated by a so-called soft
X-ray excess, which is evident in most sources. The origin is still under debate
but signiﬁcant progress has been made in recent years. Some AGNs emit powerful,
relativistic particle jets which are launched from the innermost regions in the im-
mediate vicinity of the black hole. The mechanics driving jets are not understood,
so insights into the geometry and processes in the black hole region are of great
importance.

RX J1633+4718 is a radio-loud narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxy which has been
analyzed using X-ray spectroscopy. Data from a total of nine observations were
used, four by XMM-Newton and four by Suzaku in 2011 and 2012, and one by
ROSAT in 1993. Convincing results show that the strong emission below 0.3 keV
is consistent with theoretical predictions for a standard Shakura-Sunyaev thin disk.
The X-ray spectra also clearly lacks a soft excess, primarily attributed to intrin-
sic partial covering absorption. Reﬂection features from the disk are not seen in
the observed spectra. This can be caused by either intrinsically low amounts of
reﬂection or a highly ionized reﬂecting medium. Short timescale variability can
be explained by a single ﬂux-proportional parameter. Whether the variations are
caused by a pivoting power law, a combination of constant reﬂection and a variable
power law normalization or more complex models cannot be distinguished. Varia-
tions on longer timescales are qualitatively analogous to those on short timescale
with some exceptions, revealing additional complexity. Most of the results indicate
that the observed X-ray emission from RX J1633+4718 is dominated by a jet that
is beamed close to the line-of-sight.

The results motivate further studies of accretion disk spectra in other sources.
Once accurate measurements of disk emission can be made, it will be possible

77

78

Chapter 8. Summary and conclusions

to perform independent mass or spin estimates. Details concerning the geometry
are relatively diﬃcult to constrain. Future observations will hopefully be able to
disentangle highly ionized reﬂection from direct continuum emission, in which case
conclusions can be drawn about whether or not eﬀects such as beaming suppresses
reﬂection.

Chapter 9

Acknowledgments

I owe my deepest gratitude to my supervisor Joseﬁn Larsson for guidance through-
out the project, helpful advice and invaluable insights into astrophysics and research
in general. The feedback and helpful comments on the manuscript given by Ser-
ena Falocco were appreciated.
I am grateful for the assistance given by Fredrik
Isaksson, for thorough explanations and enlightening discussions on statistics. The
assistance in programming and computer science provided by Carl Finmo and Erik
Ahlberg was also appreciated. Finally, I want to thank everyone at the Particle-
and Astroparticle physics group for the hospitable reception.

Based on observations obtained with XMM-Newton, an ESA science mission
with instruments and contributions directly funded by ESA Member States and
NASA. This research has made use of data obtained from the Suzaku satellite, a
collaborative mission between the space agencies of Japan (JAXA) and the USA
(NASA). I have made use of the ROSAT Data Archive of the Max-Planck-Institut
für extraterrestrische Physik (MPE) at Garching, Germany. This research has
made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System. This research has made use of
data and/or software provided by the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive
Research Center (HEASARC), which is a service of the Astrophysics Science Divi-
sion at NASA/GSFC and the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory.

79

80

List of Figures

2.1 AGN components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The black hole region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 AGN uniﬁcation scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Thin accretion disk spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 A schematic AGN X-ray spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1 A schematic of XMM-Newton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 A schematic of Suzaku . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1 A typical sky image

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1 XMM-Newton and Suzaku light curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Observed ﬂux, soft (0.3–2 keV) and total (0.3–10 keV) . . . . . . .
5.3 Hardness plots for XMM-Newton and Suzaku . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
8
12
18
21

27
28

34

38
40
43

47
48
49
49

6.1 Residuals of a plain power law model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Residuals of an extrapolation of a hard power law ﬁt . . . . . . . .
6.3 Residuals of a model with intrinsic absorption . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Residuals of a model with partial intrinsic absorption . . . . . . . .
6.5 Residuals of partially absorbed model with blackbody ﬁt including
52
R1 with tied partial covering fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.6 Unabsorbed model consisting of blackbody and power law . . . . .
53
6.7 Probability distribution function for additional blackbody component 54
6.8 Residuals of partially absorbed model with blackbody ﬁt including
R1 with untied partial covering fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.9 Plots of fpc and Γ against Fo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.10 Contour plot of ∆χ2 for fc and Γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.11 Plots of Npc and Γ against Fo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.12 Contour plots of ∆χ2 for fr and ξ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.13 Flux-selected spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55
56
58
59
62
64

7.1 The geometry of the black hole region in RX J1633+4718 . . . . .

72

81

82

List of Tables

3.1 Technical speciﬁcations of detectors.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1 Summary of observations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.1 Soft and total ﬂux and luminosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.1 Fitted parameter values for all power law and blackbody ﬁts . . . .
6.2 Fitted parameter values for the partially covered power law model
6.3 Fitted parameter values for the favored, partially covered blackbody
model with tied fpc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Fitted parameter values for the partially covered blackbody model
with untied fpc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5 Fitted parameter values for the ﬂux selected spectra . . . . . . . .

26

32

41

46
50

53

56
63

83

84

Appendix A

Contour plots of reﬂection
parameters

The contour plots of ∆χ2 for fr and ξ for all observations are shown in ﬁgure A.1.
The ﬁt statistic was 2456/2349 = 1.05 and the photon indices from all observations
were within the range 1.94–2.30. Contours for diﬀerent observations vary unsys-
tematically, which indicates that the ﬁtted values might be unstable, i.e. sensitive
to small ﬂuctuations. It is therefore diﬃcult to draw any quantitative conclusions.
However, it is evident from the plots that the combination high reﬂection fraction
and low ionization is unacceptable for all observations. This indicates that it is
a relatively robust feature for all spectra, despite the large ﬂuctuations. In other
words, any signiﬁcant amount of reﬂection must come from highly ionized material.

85

90

Bibliography

Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Antolini, E., et al.: 2010, ApJ 716, 835

Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Baldini, L., et al.: 2009, ApJ 707, L142

Abramowicz, M. A., Czerny, B., Lasota, J. P., and Szuszkiewicz, E.: 1988, ApJ

332, 646

Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., Antolini, E., et al.: 2011, ApJ 743, 171

Antonucci, R. R. J. and Miller, J. S.: 1985, ApJ 297, 621

Armitage, P. J. and Reynolds, C. S.: 2003, MNRAS 341, 1041

Arnaud, K. A.: 1996,

in G. H. Jacoby and J. Barnes (eds.), Astronomical Data
Analysis Software and Systems V, Vol. 101 of Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series, p. 17

Baldi, R. D., Capetti, A., Robinson, A., Laor, A., and Behar, E.: 2016, MNRAS

458, L69

Baldwin, J. A.: 1977, ApJ 214, 679

Beckmann, V. and Shrader, C. R.: 2012, Active Galactic Nuclei, Wiley-VCH Verlag

GmbH

Beloborodov, A. M.: 1998, MNRAS 297, 739

Berton, M., Caccianiga, A., Foschini, L., Peterson, B. M., et al.: 2016, A&A 591,

A98

Bianchi, S., Guainazzi, M., Matt, G., and Fonseca Bonilla, N.: 2007, A&A 467,

L19

Blackburn, J. K.: 1995,

in R. A. Shaw, H. E. Payne, and J. J. E. Hayes (eds.),
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, Vol. 77 of Astronomical
Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, p. 367

Blandford, R. D. and Payne, D. G.: 1982, MNRAS 199, 883

91

92

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boller, T., Brandt, W. N., and Fink, H.: 1996, A&A 305, 53

Boller, T., Keil, R., Trümper, J., O’Brien, P. T., Reeves, J., and Page, M.: 2001,

A&A 365, L146

Bondi, H.: 1952, MNRAS 112, 195

Boroson, T. A.: 2002, ApJ 565, 78

Boroson, T. A. and Green, R. F.: 1992, ApJS 80, 109

Brenneman, L. W. and Reynolds, C. S.: 2006, ApJ 652, 1028

Briel, U. G., Aschenbach, B., Hasinger, G., Hippmann, H., et al.: 1994, MPE:

Garching

Carroll, B. W. and Ostlie, D. A.: 2013, An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics,

Pearson New International Edition, Pearson Education Limited

Chevallier, L., Collin, S., Dumont, A.-M., Czerny, B., et al.: 2006, A&A 449, 493

Collin, S. and Kawaguchi, T.: 2004, A&A 426, 797

Compton, A. H.: 1923, Physical Review 21, 483

Crummy, J., Fabian, A. C., Gallo, L., and Ross, R. R.: 2006, MNRAS 365, 1067

Dabrowski, Y., Fabian, A. C., Iwasawa, K., Lasenby, A. N., and Reynolds, C. S.:

1997, MNRAS 288, L11

D’Ammando, F., Orienti, M., Finke, J., Raiteri, C. M., et al.: 2012, MNRAS 426,

317

D’Ammando, F., Orienti, M., Larsson, J., and Giroletti, M.: 2015, MNRAS 452,

520

D’Ammando, F., Raiteri, C. M., Villata, M., Romano, P., et al.: 2011, A&A 529,

A145

Dauser, T., García, J., Walton, D. J., Eikmann, W., et al.: 2016, A&A 590, A76

Dauser, T., Garcia, J., Wilms, J., Böck, M., et al.: 2013, MNRAS 430, 1694

Davis, S. W., Done, C., and Blaes, O. M.: 2006, ApJ 647, 525

den Herder, J. W., Brinkman, A. C., Kahn, S. M., Branduardi-Raymont, G., et al.:

2001, A&A 365, L7

D’Ammando, F., Larsson, J., Orienti, M., Raiteri, C. M., et al.: 2014, MNRAS

438, 3521

BIBLIOGRAPHY

93

Doi, A., Asada, K., and Nagai, H.: 2011, ApJ 738, 126

Doi, A., Fujisawa, K., Inoue, M., Wajima, K., et al.: 2007, PASJ 59, 703

Donato, D., Ghisellini, G., Tagliaferri, G., and Fossati, G.: 2001, A&A 375, 739

Done, C., Davis, S. W., Jin, C., Blaes, O., and Ward, M.: 2012, MNRAS 420, 1848

Elvis, M., Risaliti, G., Nicastro, F., Miller, J. M., Fiore, F., and Puccetti, S.: 2004,

ApJ 615, L25

ESA: XMM-Newton SOC: 2014

ESA: XMM-Newton SOC: 2015

Fabian, A. C.: 2006, Astronomische Nachrichten 327, 943

Fabian, A. C.: 2016, Astronomische Nachrichten 337, 375

Fabian, A. C., Lohﬁnk, A., Kara, E., Parker, M. L., Vasudevan, R., and Reynolds,

C. S.: 2015, MNRAS 451, 4375

Fabian, A. C. and Vaughan, S.: 2003, MNRAS 340, L28

Fermi, E.: 1949, Physical Review 75, 1169

Fink, H. H., Walter, R., Schartel, N., and Engels, D.: 1997, A&A 317, 25

Foschini, L.: 2011, in Narrow-Line Seyfert 1 Galaxies and their Place in the Uni-

verse, p. 24

Foschini, L., Berton, M., Caccianiga, A., Ciroi, S., et al.: 2015, A&A 575, A13

García, J., Dauser, T., Lohﬁnk, A., Kallman, T. R., et al.: 2014, ApJ 782, 76

García, J., Dauser, T., Reynolds, C. S., Kallman, T. R., et al.: 2013, ApJ 768, 146

Ghisellini, G. (ed.): 2013, Radiative Processes in High Energy Astrophysics, Vol.

873 of Lecture Notes in Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag

Ghisellini, G., Haardt, F., and Matt, G.: 2004, A&A 413, 535

Ghosh, R., Dewangan, G. C., and Raychaudhuri, B.: 2016, MNRAS 456, 554

Gierliński, M. and Done, C.: 2004, MNRAS 349, L7

Gondhalekar, P. M., Kellett, B. J., Pounds, K. A., Matthews, L., and Quenby, J. J.:

1994, MNRAS 268, 973

Goodrich, R. W.: 1989, ApJ 342, 224

Greene, J. E. and Ho, L. C.: 2005, ApJ 630, 122

94

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Grupe, D., Komossa, S., Leighly, K. M., and Page, K. L.: 2010, ApJS 187, 64

Gu, M. and Chen, Y.: 2010, AJ 139, 2612

Haardt, F., Maraschi, L., and Ghisellini, G.: 1997, ApJ 476, 620

Heckman, T. M., Ptak, A., Hornschemeier, A., and Kauﬀmann, G.: 2005, ApJ

634, 161

Ichimaru, S.: 1977, ApJ 214, 840

ISAS/JAXA/NASA: 2013, The Suzaku Data Reduction Guide -also known as the
ABC Guide-, Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS/JAXA) and
the X-ray Astrophysics Laboratory NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center

ISAS/JAXA/NASA: 2015, The Suzaku Technical Description, Institute of Space
and Astronautical Science (ISAS/JAXA) and the X-ray Astrophysics Laboratory
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center

Ishida, M., Tsujimoto, M., Kohmura, T., Stuhlinger, M., et al.: 2011, PASJ 63,

S657

Itoh, R., Tanaka, Y. T., Fukazawa, Y., Kawabata, K. S., et al.: 2013, ApJ 775,

L26

Iwasawa, K. and Taniguchi, Y.: 1993, ApJ 413, L15

Jansen, F., Lumb, D., Altieri, B., Clavel, J., et al.: 2001, A&A 365, L1

Järvelä, E., Lähteenmäki, A., and León-Tavares, J.: 2015, A&A 573, A76

Jiang, P., Wang, J. X., and Wang, T. G.: 2006, ApJ 644, 725

Jin, C., Ward, M., and Done, C.: 2012, MNRAS 425, 907

Junor, W., Biretta, J. A., and Livio, M.: 1999, Nature 401, 891

Kalberla, P. M. W., Burton, W. B., Hartmann, D., Arnal, E. M., et al.: 2005, A&A

440, 775

Karzas, W. J. and Latter, R.: 1961, ApJS 6, 167

Kataoka, J., Madejski, G., Sikora, M., Roming, P., et al.: 2008, ApJ 672, 787

Keck, M. L., Brenneman, L. W., Ballantyne, D. R., Bauer, F., et al.: 2015, ApJ

806, 149

Kellermann, K. I., Sramek, R., Schmidt, M., Shaﬀer, D. B., and Green, R.: 1989,

AJ 98, 1195

Kelley, R. L., Mitsuda, K., Allen, C. A., Arsenovic, P., et al.: 2007, PASJ 59, 77

BIBLIOGRAPHY

95

Kellogg, E., Baldwin, J. R., and Koch, D.: 1975, ApJ 199, 299

Kettula, K., Nevalainen, J., and Miller, E. D.: 2013, A&A 552, A47

Komatsu, E., Smith, K. M., Dunkley, J., Bennett, C. L., et al.: 2011, ApJS 192,

18

Komossa, S., Voges, W., Xu, D., Mathur, S., et al.: 2006, AJ 132, 531

Kormendy, J. and Ho, L. C.: 2013, ARA&A 51, 511

Koyama, K., Tsunemi, H., Dotani, T., Bautz, M. W., et al.: 2007, PASJ 59, 23

Krichbaum, T. P., Alef, W., Witzel, A., Zensus, J. A., et al.: 1998, A&A 329, 873

Krolik, J. H.: 1999, Active galactic nuclei: from the central black hole to the galactic

environment, Princeton University Press

Lamer, G., McHardy, I. M., Uttley, P., and Jahoda, K.: 2003, MNRAS 338, 323

Laor, A., Fiore, F., Elvis, M., Wilkes, B. J., and McDowell, J. C.: 1997, ApJ 477,

93

Leighly, K. M.: 1999, ApJS 125, 317

Li, L.-X., Zimmerman, E. R., Narayan, R., and McClintock, J. E.: 2005, ApJS

157, 335

Lynden-Bell, D.: 1969, Nature 223, 690

Mallick, L., Dewangan, G. C., Gandhi, P., Misra, R., and Kembhavi, A. K.: 2016,

MNRAS 460, 1705

Martocchia, A., Karas, V., and Matt, G.: 2000, MNRAS 312, 817

Mason, K. O., Breeveld, A., Much, R., Carter, M., et al.: 2001, A&A 365, L36

Mathur, S.: 2000, MNRAS 314, L17

McKinney, J. C., Tchekhovskoy, A., and Blandford, R. D.: 2012, MNRAS 423,

3083

Meier, D. L.: 2012, Black Hole Astrophysics: The Engine Paradigm, Springer,

Verlag Berlin Heidelberg

Melia, F.: 2009, High-Energy Astrophysics, Princeton University Press

Middelberg, E. and Bach, U.: 2008, Reports on Progress in Physics 71(6), 066901

Middleton, M.: 2016, Astrophysics of Black Holes - From fundamental aspects to

latest developments, Springer: Astrophysics and Space Science Library

96

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Miniutti, G. and Fabian, A. C.: 2004, MNRAS 349, 1435

Mitsuda, K., Bautz, M., Inoue, H., Kelley, R. L., et al.: 2007, PASJ 59, 1

Moran, E. C., Halpern, J. P., and Helfand, D. J.: 1996, ApJS 106, 341

Narayan, R. and Yi, I.: 1995, ApJ 452, 710

Netzer, H.: 2013, The Physics and Evolution of Active Galactic Nuclei, Cambridge

University Press

Osterbrock, D. E.: 1977, ApJ 215, 733

Osterbrock, D. E. and Ferland, G. J.: 2006, Astrophysics of gaseous nebulae and

active galactic nuclei, CA: University Science Books

Osterbrock, D. E. and Pogge, R. W.: 1985, ApJ 297, 166

Pal, M., Dewangan, G. C., Misra, R., and Pawar, P. K.: 2016, MNRAS 457, 875

Pearson, T. J., Unwin, S. C., Cohen, M. H., Linﬁeld, R. P., et al.: 1981, Nature

290, 365

Ponti, G., Miniutti, G., Cappi, M., Maraschi, L., Fabian, A. C., and Iwasawa, K.:

2006, MNRAS 368, 903

Pounds, K. A., Done, C., and Osborne, J. P.: 1995, MNRAS 277, L5

Pounds, K. A., Nandra, K., Fink, H. H., and Makino, F.: 1994, MNRAS 267, 193

Protassov, R., van Dyk, D. A., Connors, A., Kashyap, V. L., and Siemiginowska,

A.: 2002, ApJ 571, 545

Puccetti, S., Fiore, F., Risaliti, G., Capalbi, M., Elvis, M., and Nicastro, F.: 2007,

MNRAS 377, 607

Puchnarewicz, E. M., Mason, K. O., Siemiginowska, A., and Pounds, K. A.: 1995,

MNRAS 276, 20

Raymond, J. C. and Smith, B. W.: 1977, ApJS 35, 419

Rees, M. J., Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., and Phinney, E. S.: 1982, Nature

295, 17

Reynolds, C. S.: 2016, Astronomische Nachrichten 337, 404

Richards, G. T., Lacy, M., Storrie-Lombardi, L. J., Hall, P. B., et al.: 2006, ApJS

166, 470

Risaliti, G., Harrison, F. A., Madsen, K. K., Walton, D. J., et al.: 2013, Nature

494, 449

BIBLIOGRAPHY

97

Ross, R. R. and Fabian, A. C.: 2005, MNRAS 358, 211

Rybicki, G. B. and Lightman, A. P.: 1979, Radiative processes in astrophysics,

Wiley-Interscience

Schurch, N. J. and Done, C.: 2008, MNRAS 386, L1

Seyfert, C. K.: 1943, ApJ 97, 28

Shakura, N. I. and Sunyaev, R. A.: 1973, A&A 24, 337

Shemmer, O., Brandt, W. N., Netzer, H., Maiolino, R., and Kaspi, S.: 2008, ApJ

682, 81

Shen, Y. and Ho, L. C.: 2014, Nature 513, 210

Shuder, J. M. and Osterbrock, D. E.: 1981, ApJ 250, 55

Smith, M. J. S.: 2015, EPIC Status of Calibration and Data Analysis, Technical
report, on behalf of the EPIC Consortium, XMM-Newton Calibration Technical
Note

Strüder, L., Briel, U., Dennerl, K., Hartmann, R., et al.: 2001, A&A 365, L18

Takahashi, T., Abe, K., Endo, M., Endo, Y., et al.: 2007, PASJ 59, 35

Taylor, R. D., Uttley, P., and McHardy, I. M.: 2003, MNRAS 342, L31

Tombesi, F., Cappi, M., Reeves, J. N., Palumbo, G. G. C., et al.: 2010, A&A 521,

A57

Trümper, J.: 1982, Advances in Space Research 2(4), 241

Tsujimoto, M., Guainazzi, M., Plucinsky, P. P., Beardmore, A. P., et al.: 2011,

A&A 525, A25

Turner, M. J. L., Abbey, A., Arnaud, M., Balasini, M., et al.: 2001, A&A 365,

L27

Turner, T. J. and Miller, L.: 2009, A&ARv 17, 47

Vaughan, S., Reeves, J., Warwick, R., and Edelson, R.: 1999, MNRAS 309, 113

Voges, W., Aschenbach, B., Boller, T., Bräuninger, H., et al.: 1999, A&A 349, 389

Willis, A. G., Strom, R. G., and Wilson, A. S.: 1974, Nature 250, 625

Wisotzki, L. and Bade, N.: 1997, A&A 320, 395

Wu, Q. and Gu, M.: 2008, ApJ 682, 212

98

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Xu, D., Komossa, S., Zhou, H., Lu, H., et al.: 2012, AJ 143, 83

Yao, S., Yuan, W., Zhou, H., Komossa, S., et al.: 2015, MNRAS 454, L16

Young, A. J., Ross, R. R., and Fabian, A. C.: 1998, MNRAS 300, L11

Yuan, W., Liu, B. F., Zhou, H., and Wang, T. G.: 2010, ApJ 723, 508

Yuan, W., Zhou, H. Y., Komossa, S., Dong, X. B., et al.: 2008, ApJ 685, 801

Zhou, H., Wang, T., Yuan, W., Lu, H., et al.: 2006, ApJS 166, 128

Zoghbi, A., Fabian, A. C., Uttley, P., Miniutti, G., et al.: 2010, MNRAS 401, 2419


