I know what she was going through was hard but this is just a temporary feeling
And she is young indeed.
everything will be okay. I'll be there for her
It must hurt so much now though
I told her that after every bad thing that happens, there is good that happens. She is a good person and good things will happen to her
Kai that was really thoughtful of you
So I told her, You are young. There will be other boys.  And someday, you will connect with somebody special, and the feeling will be mutual.
Sounds like good advice.  How did she take it?
She buried her face in the pillow and sobbed.  You remember how it was with your first love.  It seemed like the world was over when the relationship ended.  It's the same with her.
I am so glad I am no longer a teen!
Yeah, it is hard for teens to get a proper perspective on things at their age.
Good thing you were there for her and were able to give her some perspective.  Believe me, if you were my Dad, I would listen to you.  I may still cry my eyes out, but I would listen.
I Love the way people see me
Can you explain further?
They say I am such a reasonable person and I helped a friend the other day to see her life under a different point of view 
I've been told several times by others that you are such a reasonable person.
I know she is upset about her break-up, but she deserves better.
I agree with you.
His love including punching her. That is not love.
You are right. Having a man that beats you up must be awful.
Well, I think she will find someone that truly appreciates her.
It took me years to be able to figure out what my life meant.
You are the most reasonable and understanding person I know.
I didn't use to be. I just wandered around not caring about anything.
You figured out what was important and what was not, and helped your friend to her life in perspective only yesterday.
I met Bailey's family at church.
They are good people.
I thanked them for Bailey's support.
She and they deserve that kind of recognition.
She is a wonderful nurse.
That was a gracious thing to do as she takes such wonderful care of you.
Wait, you are Bailey's mother, right?
I am!
I know she's not allowed to share what's happening at work but I can say it... She has been so incredibly helpful to me, I'll never forget it.
Oh that's so good to hear! I'm guessing you're out of the hospital now?
Yes, I had a surgery for a broken knee and had to stay several days... She was awesome! She checked in very often and brought treats.
Yes she's very caring like that.
I feel like my co-workers and I are gonna get along
why's that?
well today I was able to motivate Ash and some others at work, even though I wasn't with them for very long
oh. that's great!
yeah, I feel really accomplished
you should
I gave Ash some motivation to work today.
Was Ash feeling down about something?
Yeah, so I just boosted his and everyone else's mood.
That was really nice of you.
I know. I just don't like working in the office when it is really awkward.
Well, good job anyway. I am sure everyone appreciated your effort.
I've been able to successfully motivate Ash and the others at work.
That's great. You're doing a great job.
I've just been in this role where I have to motivate people at work for a few weeks, but I've achieved good results.
You've accomplished a lot fast.
Yeah, I've been successful at this.
Keep up the good work.
I don't know if I should admit that I got an A on the science test when everybody else failed.
Do you think there is some way that you could help them do better?
I do have some suggestions about a site I used that helped me with practice questions that were exactly like the test.
I think you should tell them then so they can pass the next one.
I would want them to help me so that's a good idea.
When I take that class next year I will definitely use it!
How'd you do on the exam?
I failed it, so did everyone else I asked
Oh, I didn't think it was that hard
What did you get on it?
I got an A and I think if my friends studied harder they could have done the same
Yeah, I don't know about that but I'll definitely study more for the next one
My friends all failed the science test but I aced it.
You must be really smart.
Not really.  I just study more.  I didn't go out partying the night before.
That helps.  Maybe if they took the test seriously, they would have passed.,
That's what I told them.  They need to get their sleep before the exam so they can think.
That's a good word of advice.
I got an A in the science test. How about you?
Sadly I failed.
Sorry to hear that. But don't be discouraged by the result.
How can I do better for the next test?
I gave some advice to my friends too today. I told them I usually take notes during the class, study hard the day before the test and have a good sleep the night before.
That really is valuable advice.
My parents said I could go to the dance Friday.
Really? Why did they change their minds?
I got an A on my English midterm and they were really proud of me, so they said I could go.
So, if you do well in school, you will be allowed to do more stuff?
It looks like I will.
Then you should study more, Alex. We have our class trip coming up and you don't want to miss that.
I tricked my parents when I got home from school and told them I got an F on my Science test but I actually got an A+
Oh my God, how did they react, were they mad?
My dad was instantly upset and my mom just kind of looked like she didn't believe me, they were pretty quiet about it
How did you tell them the truth?
I waited until after dinner and pulled out the test and put it on the table and said someone here deserves some ice cream haha, they cracked up
That is hilarious! You're lucky your dad didn't get angry at you first!
I went to see my grandmother in the hospital the other day.
Did something happen?
No, I just wanted to see her to see if I can help ease her pain.
Oh ok. What's her favorite hobby?
She loves to read.
Glad to hear.
I went to see my grandma today.
How is she doing?
She's still in the hospital.
I'm sorry to hear that.
Yeah, she's in a lot of pain but I go there to read her books in the hospital every afternoon.
That's sweet of you. Enjoy your time with her.
I visited my grandmother in the hospital yesterday.
That was nice.
Yes, I read to her; she loves to read.
Did she enjoy it?
I think so.  It did seem to ease her pain.
You'll need to keep doing that.
Baking is stressful
Have you finally made the pie?
Yes, apple pie! It took me months to perfect it
You should bring it to the pot luck
that's a good idea
I know it is
I've been working so hard learning how to bake a pie and I think I did a great job
that pie is really impressive. How long have you been cooking for?
just a few months but I practice everyday
hard work pays off they say and I can tell this is a great pie
Check out my latest creation, it took me months to learn how to bake it perfectly
wow that looks beautiful, what flavor is it?
Strawberry Rhubarb pie
Can I have a slice
sure, I'll cut you a slice right now
a big one please
I just got a new school
Wow, it's good to hear
I couldn't find my class, but I asked a girl named Tracy and she helped me find my class
That's very kind of her
Yeah, she's a beautiful girl, I admired her at first sight
Hum, this is the first time you mentioned her
I went to my new class yesterday, but I had a hard time finding it because it was down an unmarked hall.
How did you end up getting to class then?
I asked Tracy who was going to the class if she knew where it was and she showed me the way
That was nice of her, did you end up being late?
No, I ended up getting there just in time.
That's good to hear, also it sounds like you made a new friend.
I need to make sure Skylar doesn't pick up heavy things
yeah, she shouldn't, especially after what happen to the baby
of course, how can we forget.  We lost the only thing that meant a lot to us
I'm so sorry
it's fine.  Hopefully she'll be okay
She will. There is a great chance to do so much out here with a child
Skylar was expecting our first child together.  The other day she was out in the garden and picked up something too heavy and miscarried.
How horrible?  How are you guys doing?
We are both still mourning our unborn child.  We are in disbelief.
That's very sad.  I pray that you will find peace.
I find myself crying in the middle of the night.  I am not a very emotional guy.
It's okay to cry.
This is so depressing. Losing the baby.
I feel for you Addison.
Do you really. I wanted my baby boy to be here this year.
I am so sorry. I lost my first child when I was 20. I still feel it.
Well, it was my fault. I had Skylar help me lug the new baby dresser three flights.
Dude, I am always free. You should have called me.
I am really busy but I had to take my sister to the circus.
That's admirable, family is first after all.
Yeah, it was her birthday so I couldn't say no.
I'm glad you were able to take her there.
I had to ask a co-worker to help me out, it was worth it.
I bet the smile in her face was the best reward of all.
My sister really wanted to go to the circus for her birthday, so I took her.
That's sweet! I love the circus too. She must have been so happy!
I told her, this is for you. Today is about you.
Didn't you have a lot to do today?
I did, but I could move some things around. I wanted her to have fun.
I bet she couldn't wait to see the show.
I just finished taking a test, it was pretty hard.
Oh yeah? What was the test on?
It was a math test, my teacher Cameron gave it to us.
You're on a first name basis with your teacher?
Oh yeah, Cameron is really cool like that.
I wish my teacher was like that.
I'm not great at taking tests, but at least I studied for this one.
I didn't study at all!
Cameron likes to give everybody unexpected examinations. He thinks it tests our knowledge better if we're surprised and don't have time to prepare.
I think it's unfair of Cameron to do that. I, for one, need prep time.
That test I took today was difficult.
Who gave the test?
It was for Cameron's test.
Do you think you passed it?
I don't think so. Like I said, it was hard.
That doesn't sound good to hear. I have to take that same test.
I am so nervous for this test right now.
Don't be worried, Cameron's tests are usually okay. And I am sure that you studied hard.
I did study, but I am still freaking out.
Why don't you take a sip of your water and relax before you start the exam.
Thanks, I will do that.
Okay, I will be at my desk if you need anything.
Don't you know I saw someone cheating on the biology test today.
Let me guess, it was Quinn wasn't it?
Yes it was. How did you figure it was him?
Because he always cheats. He seldom gets caught though.
Yeah, he kept peeking down at his homework book which I think had the same questions as the test.
Yeah, the biology teacher always says that the test will include questions from the homework assignments.
Today I caught Quinn peeking at his homework book during the test!
I know, he said he wanted to make sure he'll get a good grade.
Cheating from your homework book is not the way to get a good grade.
Yeah but he said he had the corrections in there and the questions are the same.
It doesn't mean it's ok for Quinn to do that!
I agree, it isn't!
Hey, I'm going to steal this candy bar.
What?! Are you crazy?!
Nah, it's fine, watch! Oh, crap! the guard saw me!
Riley, wait! This is crazy!
Ha ha! He tried to tackle me, but I got away! See you later!
This is insane! You need help!
I escaped from the security guard.
The guard is always strict.
He tried to tackle me, but I got free of him.
So smart of you.
Yeah, learned it from my dad.
Oh, he's an ex convict though.
I always ace the tests
You prepare so well for every test.
I studied hard for many weeks for the last one though
So what was the result of the test?
I aced it as usual!
Congratulations
I juts got the exam back and got 100% on it.
Congratulations! Was it hard?
Yeah, I have studied for weeks for this. It's a really tough topic.
Well that's fantastic that you set your mind to it. Will you get an A in class?
I should if I can ace the next one too.
Wow. Good luck, I hope you ace the whole course.
I needed to get high grades on my exam.
So what happened?
I had to really study hard everyday, for many weeks.
Did it work?
It sure did. I aced the test.
Congratulations!
I have been studying hard for many weeks.
I know you had the big test.
Yes, and I aced it!
That's fantastic.
I guess studying does pay off.
Who'd have thought.
I'm glad I agreed with Skylar to hold these meetings in my room.
Thank you for offering
It wasn't easy to accommodate for all these people.
I can tell! I can't believe you pulled it off!
I was happy to help him!
It's difficult to hold all these meetings in my room because the space isn't big enough for so many people.
Why aren't you holding the meetings somewhere else?
Skylar's the one arranging the meetings, but she didn't have anywhere to meet and I figured my room could just barely accommodate everybody.
Skylar probably appreciates you helping her out like that.
It's only temporary, until we find a better meeting space.
I am helping Skylar with her meetings.
What are you doing?
I host them in my room.
You have a small room.
I have to move out all of the furniture when we meet to accommodate for a lot of people.
She could invite fewer people or move to a bigger room.
I can't believe that guy punched me.
It looks pretty bad.
It hurts terrible, I had to run home like this.
You probably scared some people on your way.
My face hurts so bad.
I bet, next time duck.
I've really been wanting to get into gardening lately.
Oh interesting, have you thought about what you're going to plant?
I'm thinking I'll start with some flowers.
Oh, that sounds nice.
Yeah, then maybe next year I'll try some vegetables.
Seems like a good plan.
I grew some flowers successfully.
Are these to keep the house plants company?
No, this was in my garden. I'm trying to improve the backyard.
Do you grow anything edible in your garden?
Tomatoes and cucumbers, so far.
How do you keep out rabbits and vermin?
I got the gardening itch recently!
That's pretty cool. It's a good way to get out of the house.
Yeah, I wanted a really nice one, too. Really decorative and colorful.
So you must've planted a lot of flowers?
Quite a few varieties, too. Many different colors, aromas. Lavender, sunflower, you name it!
I can't wait to see it!
Oh man, I hope the nurse will hurry up. I am ready to drop dead. I can't take it.
Jesse , the nurse will probably give you sedatives. This should relieve the pain.
I hope she will give me double the dose if she can.
She'll do what she can as long as it works with the pain.
I can't wait for the pain to be gone.
Don't be so tragic Jesse.
Call the nurse!
what is it Jesse
The pain its getting to be too much
alright dear give me a second and I'll be back with the nurse
thank you
Here, she gave me this. You should be feeling a bit better soon
The nurse came in and gave me a shot of Morphine.
Well, that's what the bell attached to the bedside table is for.
You can ring my bell, ring my bell! Ring my bell, ding-dong-ding.
I see that morphine really works.
The bell attached to my bedside table was barely reachable with the tubes attached to my arm.  I rang the bell and told the nurse the pain was increasing.
They don't usually give you strong enough painkillers at Mercy General.
It's like you have to beg.
I think they don't want you to build up tolerance.
The doctor came and doubled up on a couple of drugs.
Did the cocktail work?
These flowers are beautiful! I wonder who sent them to my office
Oooh, what kind of flowers are they?
They are like roses and succulents
I love it! Any guesses on the sender?
Maybe my dad? I'm not dating anyone
Maybe its a secret lover!
I took care of Taylor when he got out of the hospital.
When did he get home?
He was released last week.  He's been resting and I've been cooking for him.
How is he?
They operated on his leg.  He broke a bone.
That's a big deal.
Since Taylor got home from the hospital I'm making him soup every day?
What soup are you making?
Mostly chicken noodle.
It's nice of you to take care of him.
I promised him that I would when he got home from the hospital.
I just can't believe he got so sick.
With this last month of school ending and the next coming up I need to bash before I put my head down.
Do you wanna have one last big party before you have to study all month long?
That's exactly what I want.
You  know I will be down for such a celebration.
You are not the person that ever turn down a party.
In all the years you have gotten to know me very well.
I think I may have a party to celebrate the end of school
That sounds great!
Would you come?
Absolutely!  I will help get things together.
How about Friday night.
Let's start planning now!  It will be fun.
Any excuse for a party is good one for me.
Do you have an excuse for a party?
It has been a long month at school.
That fits your criteria.
I have chosen to have the long month party at my house.
I'll bring the wine.
After a month of studying hard at school, I wanted to throw a party at my house.
Who did you invite?
Some new friends and some old ones came over.
Did you have a DJ?
A buddy did spun some records.  He DJs for parties when he has time.
Sounds like you guys had a great time.
Have you ever been to the baseball card shop down on Maple Ave.
The Comics and Cards Shoppe? I haven't been there but I know its been around for a long time.
Yeah, since like the 40's.  I went there yesterday for the first time because I had some time to kill.
Did you like it?
It was great, full of collectible baseball cards, comics, games, totally lost track of time there.
Sounds great, I think I'll go check it out after work today.
I was so bored the other day and wanted to try something new.
What did you do to pass the time?
I ended up going to the baseball card shop.
Did you buy any baseball cards?
No, I just looked around and window shopped.
That is fun too sometimes, anything is better than being bored.
When I woke up this morning I realized there was no power!
What'd you do?
I called the electric company to let them know my power was out.
Was it just your house or was it a bigger issue?
They said there was a line down and a lot of people didn't have power.  They said it should be back on in a couple of hours and that's what happened.
That's good that you didn't have to go too long without power.
I've been awake for an hour and there's still no power in the house.
Yeah, the electric company said they have a few lines down now but their crews are out working the problem.
Do you know when the power will be restored.
They estimate power will be back online in half an hour.
Okay, thanks for letting me know.
No problem.
We went to our my son's game yesterday!
Your first time? It's so much fun, and a little nerve-wracking, to watch your kid play baseball.
I was terrified that he'd get injured!
Same with me when I went to my son's first game.
All things considered, he did well, even struck a batter out.
Maybe he'll be in the major leagues in a few years!
Last night my son scored the winning goal again!
How many goals does he have this year?
Five so far, and I am so proud of him!
He is having an amazing season, I can understand why you are a proud mom.
The best part of my week is watching him play hockey, I will miss it so much next year!
After ten years of going to games I can understand it will be a huge change.
Thank you for coming with me to my son's game.
Of course I would. Your son is like family to me.
Oh look! He scored a basket.
He is a great player. Does he have plans for collegiate basketball?
Yes, he does. Our state university is giving him a full scholarship.
Congratulations! We'll be at his college games, too!
I went to my son's game last night.
How did the game go?
His team won by 6 points. I just love watching him play!
He is learning to work in a team.
My son played a game of baseball yesterday, the whole family went to see him.
How did his team do?
They played really well and really hard and it was really close, but they lost.
That's too bad was he sad?
He wasn't, he had a really good attitude about it. I was very proud of the way he handled the loss, and I enjoyed the game because even though they lost they tried.
That's great it sounds like you're raising a great kid.
I can't believe Cameron took away all of my toys!
Why did he do that?
I hit my sister while we were playing together. I didn't mean to do it hard, but she started crying.
Cameron always punishes you when you hurt your sister. You've got to be more careful!
I really didn't mean to hit  my sister though.
I guess Cameron didn't  think it was an accident.
If I wanted to hit her for real I could have done it plenty of times.
That's true, but they  didn't see it like that.
I just need to get my toys back.
Did Cameron say when you will get them back?
Cameron took my toys away from me.
Why would she do that?
My sister and I were playing on the floor and she took my favorite doll, so I hit her.
You should not hit your little sister over a toy. My mom would whip me .
Cameron took away my toys
What did you do?
I hit my sister while we were playing on the floor.
Oh, that's bad, apologize.
I will.
Okay, that's good.
I thought that I could trust him.
He took money and conned a lot of women.
I don't know how we are going to get out of this mess, I am going to have to sell the house.
I could buy the house from you, and you could still live in it.
I can't wait for the concrete, floor paint to dry so I can see what my new floors will look like.
We followed the instructions thoroughly so it should come out just like the picture.
I just realized, while we did follow the instructions on mixing the paint and applying the paint, we did not follow the directional instructions.
What do you mean? We are almost done and so far it looks great.
It looks great but look up from the floor for a moment and gaze around the room. We painted ourselves into a corner! Now we are stuck standing here until it dries or risk ruining the paint job.
Maybe we should have read the entire directions rather than just the mixing and application procedures. I think we should just stay put until it dries because it would be hard to fix if we stepped on the wet paint.
It was my fault because I didn't see the mistake.
It was all our fault because we all missed it.
But I am the one in charge I need to take responsibility.
Well that is highly commendable and very respectable of you to do.
It's s the least I can do for my guys.
We appreciate everything you do.
I told Alex we were going where I wanted.
He is just a kid, give him time to grow.
I love him, but I don't know if this is going to work.
Just tell him that you guys are going out of town.
I already did tell him.
I am gonna go out of town with Alex.
That sounds like fun.
Yeah it does. But Alex wasn't all that happy about it.
If she didn't want to go, why did she agree to it?
Because I'm the boss in the relationship and I told her that we were going.
You remind me of my ex.
Did you hear about that road race on the news today?
Oh yeah, we're you directing traffic?
Yes I was and it was insane.
Wow, I could never do that job.
The most tiring is just being on my feet all day.
I can only imagine.
I'm so glad that Cameron is back at work. I gave him a big hug.
So the investigation is finished?
Yeah. He was proven to be innocent of the charges of fraud.
That's good to hear.
It was just so shocking to see him get fired because I knew he wouldn't do something like that.
Hopefully he is able to get along with the bosses at the job.
I welcomed Cameron back to his old job after he was fired from the office for fraud.
What fraud did he commit?
He was accused of embezzlement.
Those are serious accusations.
He's always maintain his innocence.  After a thorough investigation by a third party firm, we found out he was innocent.
Clear his good name.
Do you remember when I worked with Tracy at the Chinese restaurant?
I do! You said it was the best times.
Yeah, Boston is a good place to live and work.
I wish we hadn't moved.
Me too, I miss Tracy at the restaurant.
I miss all of you and Boston to!
Yea after I went grocery shopping I had to put every thing back up.
That is what I hate the most when I go shopping
And besides the part of paying for the food is also horrible
Yea don't mention that.
I know I just wanted to lighten up your mood.
I just got back from the grocery store.
Where did you put the stuff you bought?
I put some things in the kitchen cupboard, the dairy products in the fridge and the frozen vegetables in the freezer.
You should take some things out for dinner tonight.
Are you planning on cooking dinner?
Yes, and I want to use some of the frozen vegetables.
I put those things on the shelf in the kitchen cupboard.
Good idea. What about the dairy?
The dairy went in the fridge.
And the frozen veg?
Those go in the freezer.
Gotcha.
This place is awesome.
What place?
The amusement park, it rocks.
Yeah, they are fun.
I saw season ticket booth too.
Are you going to buy season tickets?
I went to the amusement park last weekend and it was so amazing!
I love that place! What was your favorite part?
I loved the entire place. I don't think I have ever had so much fun!
The prices are kind of high though.
They are, but I saw they have a season ticket booth. I am considering that because it works out to be a lot less.
Well if you get season tickets you know who to take with you next time!
I really want to get a new place.
Do you have money saved?
No, I need to save money.
Do you have a plan on how you will save money?
Yes, I'm moving back home in order to save money.
Great plan, good luck.
I have been down on my luck.
What has happened since I saw you last?
I had to move back home.
Was something wrong with your apartment?
I cannot afford the rent so I am going to save up money so we can get a new place.
I wish you luck with that.
I finally found a lawnmower I liked.
Was it one sale?
Yeah, I bought it for $80.
Can something so cheap be of good quality?
It was a mower powered just by human push, no gas. Those tend to be cheaper.
They are also less loud for your neighbors.
My neighbor was out mowing his lawn.  He has a new one that turns quickly.
Nice.  That seems like it would speed up mowing.
Yes.  With all the trees in the lawn, I really need one that turns like that.
Maybe you should get one like it.  Do you know what kind it is?
I saw the brand of it when he turned.  I think I'm going to buy one like it.
Maybe we can go to the store together.
I got into an argument with someone today.
Why were you arguing?
They wanted to overtake my position.
Did you win the argument?
Yes, I did
You must be effective at arguing.
I was arguing with a friend earlier today. I knew I was right and the other person's point was mute.
I also think he has a point though.
How can you say that?
Well why do you think he is wrong then?
He was late the other day but insisted he wasn't his fault and refused to apologize. I waited for him outside for 45 minutes!
Well I think you are right and makes sense you won the argument.
I'm the head of the debate team. Everyone knows I will keep going until I win an argument.
You need to give up every once in awhile. You are losing friends.
Friends aren't going to get me into college.
You're about to lose me as a friend.
None of you matter to me anymore.
Fine, you just keep fighting with everyone. It's not debating, it's fighting.
When I am motivated, there is no stopping me.
I can see that now, I am not sure how he lasted as long as he did.
I don't know how I do it, but once I get going with an argument, I don't stop.
It's not that you didn't stop, you also were able to maintain your power in the argument.
That is key to be able to get them to finally be quiet, is to stand your ground with facts.
I can learn a lot from you!
I got into an argument with my mom last night and she was so stubborn
what were you guys arguing about?
she wanted spaghetti and I wanted pizza
so what did you guys end up making?
we finally end up making pizza after a long argument
Cameron is giving me a heart attack
why is that?
He is always jumping around on the furniture
how much sugar do you give him?
Too much yesterday, from all his Halloween candy
He probably needs less sugar, but I see how Halloween is an exception.
I have a plan to sneak into the concert.
Can't you afford a ticket?
Yes, but it's sold out.
So what's your plan.
I'm going to copy a friend's ticket using a copier and thick paper.
I don't think that's going to work, but good luck, I guess.
Man, I got detention today after school.
What did you get in trouble for?
I was telling some jokes to Addison.
You shouldn't have gotten in trouble for telling jokes though.
Well, the jokes were dirty and the principal overheard.
Yeah, I guess you deserve the detention.
It was really hard listening to that speech
yeah I could barely hear it, it was so annoying
yeah it was. everyone else kept asking me what was being said
did you tell them?
yeah I gave them Casey's interpretation of it. It was better that way
good call, I would have done the same
I was at the meeting and my partner on the program didn't show up, so I had to give Casey's interpretation of the situation to the guests on behalf of Casey.
Oh wow, I bet that was stressful.  How did you handle it?
It wasn't too bad.  Casey has been working with me for several months so I understand everything as well as he does.
I would have liked to have been there to see your presentation.
Casey has a few ideas that I even know I can improve on, so I mentioned those also.
That's great.  I bet you get a promotion and a raise now for sure.
Check out my ride
Woah, new car man nice
Thanks, just got it today
It fits you
Got that new job I was talking about last week so it felt like I should celebrate a little
well you made a good choice
I bought a new car yesterday.
Nice, what kind of car did you buy?
I bought a blue Honda Accord.
Blue is my favorite color.
I purchased it since I got a new job and I'll use it to get around.
I am so proud of you.
Now that I got a new job, I bought a car too.
Is it a new car?
Yeah, I will be using it to drive to work.
Oh wow. No more taking that bus.
That took too long. With a car I have more freedom to work late but also leave later to get there.
That sounds great! Good luck with it!
I am overjoyed to have this new car!
You deserve it Remy, you work harder than anyone I know.
I need this car to commute back and forth to work.
I completely agree. It is a pretty cool car.
Thanks! Can’t wait to show my co-workers tomorrow.
Don’t make them jealous Remy.
I am so grateful to Ash, he is a great friend.
Is that the same Ash that lend you money last month?
Yes, he lent me money for groceries.
He has a great hear.
He does indeed, I didn't know what to do, I was out of food.
Did you pay him back already?
I wish payday was sooner.
You and me both.
Last week Ash had to lend me some money for groceries since I was low on funds.
Next time you can also borrow some money from me.
That would be so helpful, thank you!
No problem.
I borrowed money for groceries from Ash. I was low on funds.
He always looks out for his friends.
I would do the same for him if I had money.
Yes, you would.  Jan, you are a nice person.
I wish I didn't have such a hard time now only because they cut my hours at work.
That's tough.
I really appreciate Ash lending me that money, I really needed groceries
I heard he did! Missing those days from work while you were sick must have drained all your savings
It did indeed. Ash was such are a life saver! 
Well since you have all those groceries now, you can make him some lunch!
Ah that I can definitely do, thanks again for the suggestion
Of course, and say hello to Ash, he is indeed a great friend
I feel really bad about something I did today
what did you do to feel bad?
I was being really mean to people at work, I just felt angry
Why were you so angry?
I am not sure, but I felt so bad afterwards
it's okay, maybe take some donuts to work tomorrow for everyone
I cannot believe Sasha stole my most cherished possessions!
I've heard he was on drugs at the time and needed money for a fix.
Well, he's clean and sober now and that's a very good thing!
He couldn't have done it without your help.
Good to hear. Now I want him to pay it forward and make up for that theft.
I will manage to eventually. I heard he even volunteered down at the homeless shelter.
I still can't believe Sasha broke into my safe and stole all those things!
That's crazy- did you call the police and press charges?
I thought about it, but I've known Sasha forever and I feel like I should give him another chance.
I dunno man- sounds like he's not very trustworthy.
It's going to take a long time before I can trust him again.
Be careful- don't let him near anything valuable.
I think everyone should have a chance to be forgiven
Are you thinking about Sasha when you say that?
Yes! I gave her a chance for redemption.
I can't remember what she did wrong.
She stole my most precious possession!
So bad of Sasha
I am praying that Sasha doesn't break my heart again with her actions.
I can't believe you are giving her a job after she stole from you the last time.
Well I believe that everybody deserves redemption.
Yeah but she has already proven who she is. She took your most precious possessions.
It's only material. Those things can be replaced.
I won't say I told you so when she steals from you again.
I'm so freaked out right now.
I'm sorry, Cameron. What happened?
I was in a car accident today. Six cars were involved. It was a mess.
Oh my gosh! Are you okay? Are you in the hospital?
I'm fine physically. My air bag was deployed and kept me from getting seriously injured. But emotionally I'm a wreck.
I can imagine! I'm so glad that you're not hurt though. That's the important thing.
I just got in a huge car accident.
Oh no, that's horrible!
Yeah, I feel awful.
I'm here for you if you need someone to talk to.
Thanks, yeah that would be nice.
So, what happened?
I need someone to talk to
what is it?
I  was involved in a large car accident and  I'm going to the hospital now
what? are you injured?
It's just a precaution, but I really need someone to talk to
I am on my way
I just cracked my phone screen.
Oh, no. What happened?
I dropped it on the ground when I was jogging.
Oh, no. Why didn't you just stop to use your phone?
I just wanted to change the song. I was in the zone.
I am sure you can get it fixed.
I was jogging yesterday, and when I went to change the music, I dropped my phone and cracked the screen.
Oh no!! Is it just a small crack?
No, the whole screen is pretty much shattered.
Do you have any type of warranty on it?
No, unfortunately I'll have to pay to have it fixed.
Oh wow, I'm so sorry that happened to you.
I just decided last minute I would drive to my grandparent's house to spend there the holidays.
Where are they?
They live in the countryside a hundred miles from my home.
That's a long drive.
It wasn't bad.  I stopped along the way to pick up food. I just want to spend time with my grandparents.  They are getting so old.
It's great to hang out with family.
Sorry I'm late. I was stopped on the highway for speeding.
Did you get a ticket?
No. I only received a warning.
I bet it was a local cop. A trooper would have given you a ticket.
Yeah, it was a local cop. He didn't even ask for my license. Just pulled me over, told me to watch it, and then left.
You got lucky man. That would have been your third speeding ticket this year.
You would not believe how I got out of a ticket for speeding on the highway
Oh please tell! I've never gotten out of a ticket
Well to be fair I was just following the traffic, but I happened to be the last one. I ended up just crying when the officer came to my car!
Oh wow and that actually worked?
Yes I feel a little bad for lying, but getting a warming is better than having to pay a fine
I definitely agree with that! I'm going to try that next time.
I've learned that I haven't been on top of things recently.
I know the feeling. That's when you keep putting things off and avoid starting on tasks.
Exactly right, and I finally learned that the hard way. I had a swimming pool for years that I just took for granted.
That's a nice luxury to have. It can be a great way to relax.
Unfortunately, I haven't been maintaining it properly and it's started to leak water. I should have been more careful.
That's a tough pill to swallow. I wonder if you could hire a contractor to check it out.
I am going to have to fix the pool this year.
Why? What happened to your pool?
I didn't take very good care of it and now it is leaking.
That sucks! How much is that going to cost you?
I am not sure. I have to get some price quotes.
I know a guy that works with pools, I can give you his number if you want.
I can't seem to get this dog cam working. I wonder what is wrong with it.
Hang on, let me help you.
I know that it is not the app, so it must be the camera.
Okay, hand it to me.  Let me see what I can do.
Okay, you take a look at that and I am going to head back to the hotel.
Alright, I will see you in a bit after I take a look at this camera.
Hey how's it going, my dog cam doesn't seem to be working.
I've never used one, so wouldn't know how to help you there.
Perhaps, it's the batteries, I know it's not the app. I have to film this vlog soon, but need to head back to the hotel first.
Yeah, check the batteries, it could be the reason.
Back at the hotel now -  My dog cam isn't working. I was trying to get some shots of the city from a dog's perspective.....
Bummer, I've had problems with that dog cam too. We probably should have bought different ones!
Did you send yours back to the manufacturer?
Not yet, but I think I should. It should have lasted more that 5 days.
Yeah, mine only worked for a week. I'm calling them now...
Let me know how it goes. I think I should get my money back.
I need to go back to the hotel.
Why? We are having such fun here at the festival.
My dog cam isn't working. I'm afraid my dog did something.
Maybe there's a glitch with the app.
No, the app is fine. There's no live feed. Something happened to the dog cam itself. It is showing it offline.
Maybe your dog ate it. He got sick of being spied on constantly.
I need an assistant to help me proofread documents.
That can be very tedious work.
Before the meeting today I spent an hour proofreading and only found one word out of place.
That's a lot of effort to fix one little word.
It took about five seconds to select the out of place word but over an hour to find it.
You should really look into getting an assistant to help you do that from now on.
I'm happy I have a new crew of prisoners I get to show around the kitchen
the last bunch you had were stealing so many things out of there I couldn't believe it
hopefully I can show them how to cook and put the rest to work somewhere else
I hope everything works out for you
They seem like good people so I think it will
There are so many prisoners who are going to work with me to make food
You're right.  Do you know who doesn't need to work and who does?
I don't know.  There are people in the prison who haven't cooked anything yet.  I think I will grab them and put the rest to work
That is such a smart idea
Yeah, it is.  Thanks for helping me come up with a choice
Of course
I have new prisoners who will be cooking our meals.
Hopefully they cook better than the old prisoners.
The old prisoners are now doing the cleaning and laundry.
There is a lot of laundry to do for everyone.
I hope for once we get a good meal.
I'm starving and so are the prisoners.
I've been weak since last week.
So how did you go with cooking and the other chores?
I got a new batch of prisoners to cook food and put the rest to work.
Hmm, that's better.
Yeah.
Take care dear.
I got some money today!
why did you get money and from who?
I got money for my birthday from Austin
I thought he was getting you a gift
he told me he didn't know what to get me
I see, money is great too!
We taught the kids for an hour and a half yesterday.
It took you an hour and a half to teach kids one topic?
Yes, but we were able to clearly indicate the topic.
I guess that's great.
It's amazing. The kids are catching on very fast.
They'll be ready for the next grade.
I am so impressed the kids have picked up the lesson so fast
They seem like pretty smart kids and I think you wont have any problems with them
I hope so. I have had a really bad week with some of the children falling behind in class.
if you need some help with anything just let me know since i do not work this week
that would be amazing
The kids weren't really paying attention in class today.
Why weren't they paying attention?
Some new video online or video game, I couldn't really tell. I went on for an hour and a half and one had the nerve to prove they weren't listening by asking the topic.
Wow. Kids are easily distracted though, and those games are all they talk about.
I felt like I wasted the whole day.
And you will probably have to teach this topic again so that's another day.
We've only been apart for a few minutes, but I misses Sydney so much I ended up crying!
It's ok. Tears aren't all bad.
It's just so sad! Why do I always miss Sydney so much? It's just so sad we can't always be together!
It is sad. But it's part of life, too.
I like Minnie Mouse.
You have a Minnie doll I see.
I had a big birthday party with Minnie. When I turned one, that's what my parents told me
That must have been fun.
I had Minnie Mouse balloons and napkins and presents in the pictures.
Sounds like your parents really worked hard to make your first birthday party special.
Have you ever had a themed birthday party?
No I have not
I had one when I was one year old.
What as theme of he party?
It was Minnie House.
That is amazing!!!!
I have some great news for you.
I hope it has to do with Kendall.
It does, I found her.
Oh my God I’m so relieved and happy.
Everyone is feeling the same way that we have our friend back.
I’m on my way to your house right now to see her.
So, what do you think?
The vegetables are really good.
I picked them fresh from our garden today.
Well, thanks for inviting me to dinner--it's quite a treat having fresh food.
I thought you'd like it.
You weren't wrong.
I just love the middle of summer when the vegetable get ripe.
What did you pick today?
Mostly salad ingredients: lettuce, cucumber, and tomato.
Yum, will that be part of dinner?
Yes, do you want to help me make the salad?
Sure, let me wash my hands.
These squash turned out great
wow they are so big
yeah I'm going to try them out in this new recipe
for tonight?
yeah, does it sound good to you?
it definitely does
These are awesome vegetables
Yeah, they are truly great.  What are you going to do with them?
I plan on making a nice sort of soup with it
that sounds really tasty.  I hope you have the best luck
I most definitely will
for sure
I think I'm going to pass that math test today
I know, you have been studying day and night
I really want to try to do better but its just so confusing
yeah I don't really get it either
I even went to Mr Smith after class for help
woah! how was that, he can be scary
I don't think I did well on the math test.
I am sure that you did fine!
Well, I studied very hard, but it was much more difficult than I had thought.
Honestly, the test is not worth too much in terms of your overall grade.
I know, I just tried so hard.
We will have to just wait and see next week when the results come back.
I'm really worried about how I did on the math test I took this afternoon.
Didn't you study for it?
Not really. I tried to do all my studying at the last minute.
So do you think you'll get a decent grade?
I have no idea. I tried really hard to pass it.
Well, considering you didn't really study for it, I'd have to disagree.
Well, today was the day.
Yep. The big math test was this afternoon.
Do you think we did okay?
Come on! I know you've been up all night studying Taylor, what could have gone wrong?
This test sure was hard.
Don't worry too much Taylor. It's going to be okay.
I had the math exam today.
How did you do?
I don't know yet but I tried really hard studying this week.
I am sure you will pass it.
I hope so; we find out next week.
Good luck!
I'm so happy I decided to move!
Yeah I miss you, but I'm really excited for you!
Yeah I'm a little nervous, but I am excited for the upcoming adventure in store
Well I'll be sure to visit you soon!
You know I would love that! The sooner the better
Okay I'll be sure to try and come soon
I am looking forward to meeting new friends and having adventures in the new town.
You just moved there right?
I got here a week ago.  People are so friendly here.
Have you made a lot of friends.
Not a lot but a few.  They want to do things with me.
That's great.  They'll show you around.
I'm really excited about my move.  I think I'm going to have so many adventures as I explore.
I'm jealous! It's such a great opportunity.
It is.  I'm so glad I accepted the job.  I'm going to miss everyone back home, but I really think I'll like it.
If you keep a good attitude and are open to new experiences, you definitely will.
That's my goal.  I'm going to make sure to really take advantage of the move.
I can't wait to come visit you.
Today I wiped Remy's eye with a tissue.
Oh no, what happened to Remy
She was crying about your friend dying.
Oh, sorry to hear that, poor Remy.
I'll make sure to be there for her whenever she needs me.
That's sweet of you Alex. It's nice to have a friend like you.
I am very sorry for Remy's loss.
What happened?
I had to give her some comfort as one of her friends died.
That sounds horrible, poor Remy.
Yeah, I wiped her tears away, and tried to do something fun.
That's nice of you Alex. 
I hate to see Remy cry!
Why was Remy crying?
She had been crying about the death of her friend.
Ohhh! that is so sad!
I had to wipe her eye with a tissue.
I'm so sorry about her loss.
I cannot believe Ash's got away with it, his parents were so angry with him!
Yeah, that was bad. Not only could he has gotten hurt, but also his sister!
I also had to tell ash what he did was wrong.
That's because you care for him and so do his parents.
Ash just don't understand me at all.
You've been friend for some time Sydney, he will understand you and care. Please believe that.
Ash deserved to get reprimanded by the parents for being reckless.
Was what he did really that bad?
He took the kids in class to an R-rated movie without permission.
I'm sure kids see worst things on the internet.
Doesn't matter. I gave him hell for it too since he could have gotten sued.
I'm sure the kids don't hate him for it.
I try to cramp in as much as I could when I have a free minutes.  I don't get many of those.
You need to take a break once in a while.
I am finishing up school and working two jobs to support myself.  There really isn't a free minute most days.
It's like you want to slow down but can't.
Exactly.  When I put my head down on my pillow every night, I feel so relieved.
You can rest.
I had my first session with Taylor, the therapist Kai recommended to me.
How was it, did you like him?
I did, we talked about how I am having trouble grieving for my mom.
I hope they can help you find some peace, I know how upset you have been.
I hope they can too.  I need to give Kai a call to thank her for the recommendation.
I am sure she will appreciate knowing that it was a positive experience for you.
Hey, I'm so impressed for how Kai helped me out with a great therapist named Taylor.
I bet you were grateful for the help.
Yes I was. I totally thanked Kai for giving me Taylor's support.
Kai has turned into an awesome friend, don't you think?
Absolutely. I really have to do something nice for her now.
That's a good idea. We need to plan something we can do for her as a group. Maybe take her out or something
Have you seen my glasses?
I thought I saw them upstairs, in the hallway bathroom.
I can't believe I have to climb that staircase again.
I know. This house is so huge.
Climbing those stairs is like doing a morning workout.
You should ask your friend to install an elevator Sasha.
I spent some years in jail.
Wait. You were in jail. What happened?
It's a long story. It has to do with my failure in college.
You failed in college but it doesn't mean you had to go to jail.
I could not find any job so I ended up committing crimes. As a result, I served 17 years jail term.
I am sorry to hear that. I hope everything works out for you now.
I'm going to donate to that charity the television just showed.
The one with the orphan kid after the hurricane? Yeah that was heart-breaking.
Yeah, I'm calling the number now.
How do you know they're legitimate? It's risky to give out your credit card number over the phone.
Well what would you do?
I think you should do some online research about the organization first. If they are a good organization then donate through their website.
I can't believe how long it took me to find a job. I am so thankful.
I know what you mean. When we were in school finding work seemed so easy.
They lied. I interviewed daily and I'm just finding work.
I happy you found a job in your field.
I would have taken a job in any field.
Well, we are blessed. New jobs in our field.
I am so glad I finally found a job.
I told you not to lose hope.
I was so desperate, searching for one for several months.
Is it a good paying job?
Yes and it is my dream job
You better do your best to keep it.
I was so hungry and my mom wouldn't let me get food.
You only had to wait for everyone else.
I wanted first dibs.
There was so much food, it's not like you were going to miss out on anything.
You don't know that.
Okay.
I touched the food
your mom told you not to
I know I couldn't resist
you need to watch yourself
I felt way too hungry
eat a snack earlier
I was so hungry after going to the dentist.
You have to wait for the tooth to set before you eat.
That's what my Mom said. She watched me closely as I fiddled with my tooth.
That's the worst thing you can do.
I know. My Mom said that.
I see a pattern here.
I am glad that I fixed this broken air conditioner.
You are really resourceful!
Well, my dad was a mechanic and I learned a lot from him.
That’s really attractive Alex, fixing things.
Are you saying that you are attracted to me ?
No! Not at all.
I feel like I’ve been doing a lot of fixing in the group lately
I love how you fixed these little issues that have been coming up in the group
I wonder why this is happening?
You are all venturing out into different parts of the world and doing different things.
Do you think that is what’s causing the issues?
I think it’s a part of it.
I had to thank Sydney for saving me from those robbers
I heard that you were in danger so Sydney helped you out
This is another reason Sydney and I are friends
Right, right.  you are lucky he was able to call the police in time Lee
Yeah and the robbers heard them and fled the scene really fast
Yeah It was crazy to see their reaction too.  I thought it was insane
I am so thankful that Sydney showed up when he did.
What did Sydney have to do with it?
He was on the shoreline and saw me struggling in the waves.
Wow. Was it just like in the movies. Sydney dragged you to shore and had to pump all the water out and get you breathing again?
I actually don't know. I must have passed out and came to at the hospital. I was told what happened.
Thank God Sydney was there.
I should thank Sydney for saving me!
Lee you're lucky, Sydney just barely saw that car coming in time
He was so brave to run and push me out of the way
That's what any good friend would do
Was Sydney ok? Any bruises or stuff like that
maybe a couple but he was ok
I needed Sydney's help today, my skin was burning.
I heard he got you some aloe.
Yeah, and even with that it still hurts so badly.
Hold on one  second, let me break off more aloe for you.
Oh, that feels better.
I am glad that the pain is not as bad now.
I believe Sydney saved my life.
By stopping you from going to the rally?
Yeah. Everybody is coming down with COVID now.
That's awful.
Yeah. Sydney saved me from that.
Glad Sydney helped you Lee.
Jesse is a hard one to beat
Did you play in the tournament?
Yeah we both had one last game to determine the champion
Who won?
no results yet
I hope it's you, Remy!
Jesse and I were tied for the championship, so we had to play one final game.
That's tense!  So what ended up happening?
Jesse castled and sacrificed his bishop, and then I was able to get his king's rook with my queen.
Haha!  Jesse always castles too late in the game.
Yep.  One more move and I checkmated him with my queen and her knight.
Jesse isn't nearly as good as he seems to think he is.
Whoever wins I hope both me and Jesse just have a good game
you're just saying that because you know Jesse going to beat you
I wouldn't be say that, I have been practicing a lot lately
I guess we are about to find out aren't we
Yeah, I'm a bit nervous
I pushed myself today!
What did you do?
I jogged the entire route today.
You didn't walk?
No, not once!
wow, well done.
Here's my plan. We need to carry this cement from first floor up to 4th floor.
Isn't it a little heavy for the 2 of us? Carrying 250 lbs of cement?
We will never know if do not try it first.
This is impossible. We will never able to make it, Austin!
You are right,. Let's just abandon this cement here and leave.
Let's go.
Remember me telling you I was finally going to get around to restoring that old car in the back?
Yes, did you do it?
Well I tried but I realized I didn't even have half of the tools or parts I would need
Can you get the things you need and then try again?
No it is going to be too expensive, I'll just sell the car as is and not do the restore on it
I guess that is a valid option, but I know you really like that car!
I was so stupid that I thought I could win her love back.
I told you that she had already moved on Austin, you have to let it go.
The flowers, the candy, the money, none of it seemed to matter. I just abandoned the plan altogether.
You can't win her back with that kind of stuff. You should have shown her affection and loved her, while you still had her.
I know that now.
My friend Sash welcomed my daughter for a visit.
Is your daughter the blind girl?
Yes and my daughter wanted to know where the bathroom was located.
Did Sash show her?
Sash graciously walked my daughter to the bathroom.
Sash is a kind soul.
Psst. Pass this note to Sarah.
You pass it.
I tried. I moved my desk closer to her but I still can't reach her or make eye contact with her.
Why can't you just talk to her after class?
Because I heard Fred is going to ask her to the dance right after class and I need to ask her first.
Fine. Give me the note.
My mom needs to apply sunscreen on me again.  She does it a few times a day when we are out in the sun.
She's protecting your sun from damage.  You'll thank her when you get older.
I am already in high school and still does that.  It's not like I can't apply sunscreen on myself.
Sometimes it's easier for someone else to rub it in.
I get it.  I get burnt so easily that I need to drench myself in sunscreen.
Or not go out in the sun.
My mom is so worried about me getting burned.
Well you do have red hair and really fair skin, Austin.
But it's a little embarrassing to have my mom yelling at me to put on sunscreen.
Yeah, that would drive me crazy.
I guess I'll keep putting in on every now and then so she'll leave me alone.
Sounds like a good idea.
I hate having to judge this singing competition
Yes, everybody is so good.
It's not that; it's just that Jan is my friend.
Well, you shouldn't be judging at all.
I didn't know that Jan was in it when I volunteered, and I'm the only judge; everybody else dropped out. so I couldn't quit.
Well, it's too late to pull out now.  You'll just have to make a fair decision and hope everyone accepts it.
I really need to practice these lines so I can get to know my character
Do you need help practicing with someone?
that would be amazing! Do you  think you can help me?
sure, that's not a problem, lets get started
Oh my god, I can't believe I only have a week to prepare! What am I gonna do?
Calm down, you're gonna be fine. Now's not a time to panic. You already prepared for the role, right?
Yea but I forgot a lot of it since they turned me down the first time around. I'm gonna need you to help me this week with the role man.
Oh I don't know how much help I would be these days Kendall. It's been many years since I walked the wooden planks of a Broadway stage. Those glaring lights and the sea of people feeling your every move.
Nonsense, it's a T.V program, you'll do fine. Just remember, this could be the gig that catapult's my career into superstardom, so we both need to be completely focused.
Agreed. Thanks I needed that. We can rehearse at my cabin, it's a perfect spot in the middle of the woods. It's cozy and there'll be no interruptions.
I just got back from my friend's home where I went for a visit.
Hope they are doing okay. What happened?
My friend Kendall got home from the hospital after she got in a motor accident and fractured a couple of bones.
Ouch! I'm sure Kendall was grateful for your support.
I brought some freshly baked scones and fresh fruit along with some Gatorade. I will do everything I can to help ease the pain.
You are a true friend. All that you do for others is wonderful.
I've been busy buying supplies for Kendall since she just got home from the hospital.
It's really nice that you're taking care of her.
Im happy too. She would do the same for me.
Do you want me to help you out with anything?
Thanks. But I think I have everything Kendall needs.
I hope she remembers all this around the holidays.
I just brought Kendall all the supplies she needed
I heard she just got home from the hospital?
Yeah, she was in the maternity ward, just had a little daughter
Oh, that's great news
I feel so bad about my behaviour the other night at the party
What did you do?
I was taking meds and wasn't supposed to drink but it was a party so I drank way too much!
Oh no, did you cause a scene?
I think so, I was told I made a spectacle out myself but I don't even remember
I hope you apologized and learned your lesson!
I feel like absolute crap today. I shouldn't have been drinking last night.
Did you have too much fun last night?
I made a fool out of myself so I doubt I was having much fun.
You didn't drive did you?
No, I had way too much to drink to drive. Thankfully, someone brought me home.
Dad was on another drunken bender last night.
OMG I'm so sorry to hear that.  What happened?
He cursed and screamed at Mom as usual, but this time he actually slapped her.
Oh my goodness!  Bless your Mom.  Is this the first time he's actually put his hands on her?
First and last!  I took him down with one punch and screamed that he better never lay another finger on her or he'd have to deal with me!
Good for you standing up to him and for your Mom!  You're a brave and good son.
I knew that this day would come.
What day are you talking about?
The day that I stood up to my abusive father.
I’m so sorry to hear about your father.
Don’t be because that man has serious drinking issues.
Austin, I really hope your father is not too abusive.
I stood up to my father yesterday after he's beating us up every day and punched him hard.
You need to report this. It was self-defense.
Do you think that it was the best thing to do, you know he was drunk as usual.
Did you really hurt him?
He looked fine when I saw him this morning, only got a few bruises, hope he learnt the lesson and won't be abusive anymore.
I told my sister about our trip because everything was already planned out.  It was supposed to be a surprise for my sister.
Where are you going with your sister?
She has always wanted to go to France.  I am doing well at work so I saved up for a trip for both of us.
That's so nice of you.  You guys will have an amazing time.  I love France and its culture.
I wanted her to know so she can plan out what she wants to do too.  I know she's really into art and might want to go to the museums.
There's so much to do and see there.
I have planned a trip to Vegas with my sister this weekend!!!
Oh, nice! When do you leave?
We leave on Friday and come back Monday.  I have every detail planned.
Was your sister happy?
She said I'm the best.
I hope she'll buy you a drink at the club to thank you.
I have to talk to Kendall soon.
That sounds ominous Jan, what happened?
I lost all of our money at the casino tonight.
What!? You were already low on rent money.
I'm so sorry.
I don't even know what Kendall will say, she'll bee too shocked.
You lost all of my money at the casino.
I'm so sorry, I know  we were already low on money, I was trying to make some money for us.
Well, now we have no money to pay rent!
I'm really sorry I'll will go and try to get a job.
Well, that would be a good idea!
I promise, it will be fine.
So Kendall, I know it's been a tough month but, I have something to tell you.
Okay, spill the beans because I know it's gonna be bad.
I lost all your money playing the slots at the casino.
You must be kidding. I should not have listened to you, and let you borrow the money.
I know we are short on rent money, I swear I will make it back. I will go and find a job
Okay, I hope you have a good plan for this.
So ehm, ...I went to the Casino after work last night.
Oh, no. I hoep you tell me that you gain some money, as we are tight?
Sorry, I lost it.....all of it. I'm so sorry. I don't know what happened.
I know what happened. You gambled away all our money for the rent.
I know and I'm sorry. Can we still afford rent this month?
Well, considering we were already low on rent BEFORE you went gambling... No, we can't!!! I'll have to ask my parents to borrow money again. Just great!!!
I finally solved the equation, Taylor had to do for her homework.
You helped with her math homework?
No, it was her Physics homework. I teach math, but her physics homework is really hard.
And you figured it out?
Yes, it took a few tries though. I am surprised what she has to learn.
It sounds like a tough course. So good she has you.
Oh, Taylor I got the answer.
Really? Thank you so much Lee, really appreciate your help.
Not, a problem. You just have to apply Jean's Lamarck theory.
Alright.
You see , like this.
Thank you so much, Lee.
It was so nice to see the smile on Riley's Moms face today.
Did you end up going over there?
Yeah, it was her birthday, and I wanted to give her a card and thank her for all she does for us.
That was so nice of you! Did she like it?
She loved it. She didn't expect it either, which was the best.
It's always nice to give a happy surprise like that.
I'm glad you told me that it was your mom's birthday yesterday.
She really liked the card you gave her.
This is great, so glad she likes it. I love making cards for special people.
It really made her happy, and she wanted me to tell you.
This is so sweet of her!
My mom liked the card you gave her for her birthday.
this is lovely, I'm glad she liked it.
Did it take you a long time to make it?
Yeah, it took a couple of hours. I wanted to make it special, because she's helped you out a lot.
The card really brightened her day. It made her so happy.
Thank you so much for letting me know, it makes my day, too.
How was your mom's birthday yesterday?
We had a great time with a nice long dinner and a great movie.
That sounds like a great way to spend the day.
I am supposed to say thank you for the wonderful card you sent her.
No problem, I am just glad she got it in time.
The poetry was beautiful and it really made her day.
I'm glad you remembered to wake me up, since you forgot to set the alarm
I know, I went home ,and then remembered that I forgot to set it, so tried to call you
gosh, so sorry. I guess I turned off my phone since I didn't want anyone to bother me.
That's alright, I guess everything worked out in the end, and we had no problems
Same, here
It's funny, my mom told me today that I was underweight at birth.
Oh really? You're a prize fighter now!
 I agree, I guess I started  making it up by eating and exercise.
You probably did. You always tried to increase your strength.
Yeah, even when we were little I wanted to be strong.
Well you did it, against odds I guess!
I am so proud of my hard work, to get to where I am at right now
you really have put on so much muscle in the past six moths
I work out everyday, especially on weight lifting
Did you use the protein powder that I gave you?
I do, thank you. I have it every morning when I wake up
I had to pull up the entire bed to show him that there is no monsters hiding under there.
Did he believe you?
Yes he did, after I pulled up the whole bed.
How long did he sleep after this?
A normal 9 hours.
Wow, that is impressive!
Monsters! Don't worry, there is no monsters on this world.
They do exist! I hear them every night.
Don't be afraid, come with me. See, there is nothing other then dust hiding under your bed!
I keep hearing noises and it seemed to come from under the bed
Sometimes the house do make cracking sounds, but is is only the wood expending or shrinking due to weather. Now we see there is absolutely no monster under your bed, try to sleep, now.
Lee just had fears about monsters under her bed.
oh poor little lady, they are at that age now.
Yes, she is so sweet. I put her at ease by showing her that there is no monsters under her bed.
That is good parenting.
I try my best so she can have a good sleep.
Yeah , I hope it helps, and she will get better nights.
I had such a wonderful time having lunch with the guys!
Sounds like you had an unforgettable afternoon.
That's very true. We went out to a local sushi restaurant.
Wish that I was invited. You always get invited to such fun places.
Next time, I'll be sure to invite you.
Thank you, Cameron.
Hey, what are you guys up to for lunch?
We're about to head down to the Potbelly sub shop now.
Oh, great, can I join you, since I haven't gotten lunch?
Yes, sure, hop in the back, I take you there.
Thanks you so much, really appreciate this.
Not a problem, you can't miss the tasty subs at Potbelly for lunch.
I went out to lunch, with friends from my old job, today.
That sounds good,  where did you guys go?
We went to this restaurant down the street from their office.
You drove all the way back to where you used to work?
It was an hour there and back, I don't think I will do this again.
Maybe next time you guys can meet halfway, for happy hour after work.
Here, let me do the laces for you
Thanks so much, I always have trouble with the gloves
I love them, these gloves really bring the whole thing together
I agree! I was so excited, when saw them
You are going to set the room on fire tonight
Thank you Remy, you' re simply the best
Tracy looked amazing this weekend.
That's because you are a great trainer.
I was just a helper, I am not the trainer.
Maybe you should consider to be the trainer.
Maybe one day, I just don't feel ready right now.
Don't rush, do this at your own pace, but you are great.
It's cute how my little sister thinks she's so good at hide and seek.
Where did she hide?
She ran under the bed, I could totally hear her.
It must be a quick game, I guess.
Nah, I pretended that she did a good job.
I agree, this makes the game much more fun for her.
My sister and I played hide and seek.
oh ,that is nice.
It was really fun. She mostly hid under her bed.
It is always great to spend time with family.
Yes, my family comes first.
That is lovely, I am so happy you had a great time with you’re your family.
Sorry I missed your call, I was playing hide and seek with my little sister.
I remember when we used to play that game, those good olden days.
My sister is so good at playing that game, sometimes I really struggle to find her.
Where does she like to hide?
Last time she ran under the bed and curled up so small, I couldn't see her in the dark.
You need to get a flashlight, next time you play.
This is a nice shout out, I certainly will do this
I thought it was fun to prank my parents!
Oh, what are you going to do?
I'm going to do some magic tricks.
Magic tricks are for kids, I believe.
Well, aren't we all kids.
Actually I do agree, that's true.
There is a crazy prank that my parents fell for, today
What did you do?
I put a fake rat in the house and my parents screamed !
Oh wow that is funny.  I bet it was a memory they won't forget
Yes, it really was
You are such a funny prankster
Hey mom and dad can you come here for a second, please. I think somebody was sick
Oh no, Ash, what is that on your floor
there might have had an accident
Is this dog poop? Oh dear, it smells horrible
Relax, its just a prank its all fake, the smell is from this bottle
you got me worried, please clean this up. Dinner is in around 20 minutes
There are a lot of eggs
Yeah there most definitely are
These eggs are so good
And I have to say, it is probably because of you are taking such good care of the chickens
I did, it has been really hard work
 And this hard work has definetly paid off
I just love having my own chickens.
Have you given them all names?
I did actually.
Do you get eggs from your hens?
Yes, I eat eggs every single day.
You must really love eggs.
These eggs I have are delicious.
Where did you buy them from?
I don't buy them, I have chickens as pets.
Ah that is nice, are they easy to raise?
There are some difficulties, but I get to eat eggs everyday.
I'd love to try your eggs one day.
Sure, I get you some, you will love them
What do you want me to buy at the store?
Don't change the subject. Why were you at John's house?
I'll make ham this week. Do you want potatoes with it or rice?
Come on, this is serious. Why were you there?
I think you need to just let it go. How about I make an apple pie?
I do not understand why you won't tell me.
So the idea of the experiment was to put the subjects under severe stress, in a days-long interrogations, and see if they could get them to inform on friends....
And you were a subject? How bad was the interrogation.
it was brutal. The interrogators were skilled in psychological manipulation, and privacy was ignored to make it realistic. All areas of my life were open for scrutiny. They would have terminated the experiment if they thought I couldn't handle it.
And they put you through this for days, you say?
Six hours a day for five days, without a break. And they paid $150 a day and a bonus for hanging in through the end. So I'm OK with it, but my stomach's been upset since.
It can't be good to be under that degree of stress for that length of time.
Well, I never said a word to the cops. They tried to make me talk but I wouldn't.
Oh no, what are you into now? I thought you stopped that kind of life.
I did stop. I haven't done anything. They're just trying to get some names out of me, but I'm not gonna tell them.
Maybe you should talk, so they'll leave you alone.
No way, cops might leave me alone, but then I would have other guys mad at me.
You're probably right. You did the right thing.
I dressed eloquently today, and I got so many compliments.
You sure look great.
I try to always be.
Why are you all dressed up?
I feel good when I look good.
You always look good.
I finally was able to get tickets for the concert.
Really? I thought they were all sold out.
I had to go on eBay, and bought them for almost twice their normal value.  It will be worth it, though.
I see, you really wanted to go watch the band, didn't you.
They are never going to be any closer to our town than they will be for this tour.
I guess, I should have tried to get tickets too.
This pizza does not taste too good.
yes I agree, what shall we do?.
Well, let's scarf it down, and get out of here.
Oh dear, are you alright?
no, I'm cho, choking.
I know the pizza is bad, but please don't let it kill you.
I finished with my research.
You have to tell me all about it.
sure, I started off by doing field work.
This sounds exciting to ne already.
Yeah, I can tell that you have a genuine interest.
I do! I have  always been fascinated by field work.
Did you get the text, I sent about the party I am having?
Yes I got it, and I am definitely coming!
That's good, because no one else has responded yet.
When did you send the texts out?
I sent them out an hour ago.
Well I wouldn't worry about it, give them sometimes, since it was only an hours ago. I am sure they will come.
I sent out a bunch of texts just now, to invite my friends to a party.
What is the party about?
I am throwing a baby shower for my best friend, who is expecting twins.
Thais is incredible. I bet she is excited . Does he has any children
Yes, she has three kids,  I am not sure how she's going to manage with two more.
She might consider hiring help.
Did you get my text this morning about the party?
I did, I thought it was a joke.
It's not a joke, I'm having a birthday party this weekend and you're invited.
I am not sure if it is a good Idea, with the current lockdown situation.
I only invited another two, and we'll wear masks and keep enough distance to be safe.
That sounds good. I really want to see other people and socialize. I'll come to your party.
I finally made it home, just in time for Christmas.
this is great, so happy you made in back in time.
It will be the first time this year.
It's difficult with your college being so far away.
I would have been nice if my college was in the same state.
You can't have it all.
Well, I guess I won't be seeing you for about two weeks when I'm back.
Back from where, are you going somewhere?
I talked to Alex today. I surprised her with plans to go down to the beach for vacation.
Oh that sounds really nice, I  bet she is excited?
Yes, she is very excited. She's been working so much, so I think the time away will be good for her.
Well I hope you both have a great trip. Take lots of pictures!
I know it was stupid to go mountain climbing by myself.  I really wanted to prove to myself that I wasn't scared.
I can't believe you did that. It is so dangerous.
I know it was a big risk, but it was something I had to do.
I am so glad it went well. I hope it has made you feel better.
It really did. You know what, you should go mountain climbing with me next time, you will love it.
I am not sure, have not tried anything like this before.
I thought that if I went climbing on the mountain by myself, it would show them I was strong.
Going on that mountain by yourself was so dangerous.
I had to prove to myself, that I could do it.
It could end up worse, I am so glad you are alright. Next time, you should have taken one of us.
I will for sure. I just had this feeling that I need to let myself know I can do it.
if you feel like this again, please do call me. We are friends and I am always here for you
I had such a great time, it was amazing.
That's not the point. You could have been in trouble and all alone.
Nothing bad happened. I knew it would be okay.
Next time, it might not be. Promise me you'll always go with someone.
Alrigh, if it will make you feel better, I promise I will take someone with me.
That's a promise and you can't break it.
I went mountain climbing by myself over the weekend.
What all by yourself? That sounds dangerous.
Yes, I agree. It was risky going alone.
Is there a reason why you went alone?
I wanted to show my courage.
Did something happen? You know, there are other ways to do that without risky your life.
Alex packed my car up for me today.
That's really nice of him. Why did he do it?
I am going away, but I had so much to sort out. Plus, he's a much better packer.
Did everything fit?
Yes it did.  I'm all set to leave first thing tomorrow now.
He's a big help to you.
I'm so excited about going to Spain for three weeks, but dread packing.
I'll be happy to help you pack.
That would be great, especially since I don't even know where to start!
No problem. I will come by after work.
Great! I will try to have some bags packed already.
Okay. I can put them in the car and help you to the airport.
I still can't find my phone. I even looked in your car
Are you sure you searched everywhere for it
Yes, we even ended up cleaning your car, just to make sure I didn't miss it
If the ringer is on, we would be able to call it.
I know, but I came from church and I had to put it on silent mode
Maybe you dropped it in church. Let's call the church
I wasn't able to find Skylar's phone.
Where did you guys check for it?
We checked her car and even cleaned it.
Did you guys try calling it?
Yeah, but without any luck.
I guess she's going to have to buy a new one.
I just don' t know where I put the phone.
Did you check Skylar' s car?
I checked everywhere for it.
Want me to come over and help you?
Yes, that would be much appreciated, thank you.
I'll be over in a little bit.
I can't find my phone anywhere.
Did you check my car .
Yeah, I clean out your car, but it was not there.
I am sorry, have you tried calling it or using the track my phone app?
Not yet, but a good shout out, will do it now
Well, I finally know who has been taking my money?
Really?  Who was it?
It was Jesse!
Are you sure?  How did you catch him?
I left the money out on the counter and watched him.
I can't believe he took your money.
I left money on the counter in the kitchen and watched Jesse closely.  Someone has been stealing my money.
Do you think it's Jesse?
I have my suspicions.
Did you find out anything?
Jesse didn't touch the money on the counter, so he's probably not the one stealing my money.
You still don't know who've been stealing money from you.
Someone has been stealing money from me.
Who do you think it is?
I think it's Jesse.
What are you going to do about that?
I am going to leave money on the kitchen counter, and hide and see if he takes it.
You should film it with your phone as evidence.
Do you want to stay over at my house?
I don't know,  I really need to go home and study for the big test tomorrow
But we could study here! I just want to spend some times together
Alright, but promise that we will study
I promise!
I'll stay over then!
What are you going to do after school?
I don't know, maybe just chill at home.
Do you want to stay over mine tonight?
Yeah we can have a slumber party.
So should, we just ride the bus to my house?
I will call my parents from your house and let them know.
I proved to Kendall the answer was correct.
What answer?
The answer to a question we were asked, which Kendall doubted.
How did you prove that the answer was correct answer?
I google it.
That's very smart.
Kendall and I just got into a big debate over the correct answer to a trivia question.
What was it about?
It was about the first scientist to find a vaccine, and I told her the answer, but she doubted me. She googled it thinking I was wrong.
Who ended up being correct?
Me of course! I knew what I was talking about!
Haha. I bet you didn't let that one go!
I just made this killer Dagwood sandwich! Doea it not look yummy?!
Robin, you know you haven't feed your little brother.
He's old enough to make his own lunch.
Robin! I don't thing a four year old should hold any sharp object to slice the bread loaf?
Yes, you are right. Alright,  I will give him half my sandwich.
Wait! Cut it in thirds, please, how about me?
oh my brother is hungryx, too.
You only have one sandwich. What are you going to do?
That's not a problem, I'll cut it in half.
This is very kind of you?
yes of course, why wouldn't I?
This is very kind of you.
My brother was super hungry
Did you give him something to eat ?
I gave him half of my sandwich
I'm sure that will be enough for him for now
I hope it was
I cant believe this is really happening
Oh my god, can you see what Quinn is seeing, too?
Yes I do, I see it as well, this is unbelievable.
I feel the same way.
I don't even know how to describe this man.
I know, me neither.
See this ball, this was the ball I hit over the fence for the winning grand slam home run.
I heard that, they said you guys were losing pretty bad.
We were, until the coach finally put me in at the top of the seventh inning.
Is that when you started scoring?
No, but I did catch a few fly balls to stop them from scoring. It wasn't until the ninth inning when I hit the homer, that brought in the runs to win the game.
Wow, just proves that one player can chance the tide of the game, and bring a win home for the team.
I did super well in the game today.
Did your team win the game?
Yeah we did. We were losing early on, then my coach put me in, and I was able to turn it around.
You're a true sports star now.
This is bad, the team is losing badly.
I'm going to get in the game.
Let me put the ball in your hands.
Thank you, will do my best.
Go and help the team to win.
Will do.
I finally got off the bench last night, it was amazing.
Coach decided to send you in?
He did,  I was put in the game, because we were losing badly.
It is so nice that you got to play.
It was even better than that, because I was able to lead the team to victory.
This is even better. How many points did you score?
I am feeling kind of bored right now, do you want to come over and play?
Sure, I will be right there.
Okay what do you want to play?
How about we play Guitar Hero together?
Sure, that sounds fun.
Okay I will bring over my controller.
I'm so glad that you could come over to see me!
I missed you, and I was getting bored at home.
yes, me too. So what do you want to play?
How about we play that board game we played last time I came over?
That sounds good, but I think I lost a few of the game pieces.
That's okay, we'll do the best we can with it!
It's weekend and I am so bored.
What do you want to do?
Do you want to come over to play.
Sure! I get some snacks over as well?
this be so nice, thank you.
Give me a list to buy, see you in a bit.
I went outside and flew a kite for an hour today.
That sounds very relaxing. Where did you fly the kite?
I went to a park nearby. There are too many trees in my backyard to fly a kite.
Yeah, trees and kites don't mix.
Not at all. The park is so big and there's plenty of room to move.
Maybe I'll go with you next time you go to fly a kite at the park.
We were cooped up at home all week because of the rain.
It is nice outside now.
As soon as the rain stopped we went outside to fly a kite.
This sounds like great fun, it really is a pretty spring day.
We badly wanted to be outside, and kite flying was the perfect solution.
You picked the right activity for a spring day.
It's a beautiful day to fly a kite.
Yes, really nice wind today.
I've been wanting to try this new kite out.
Your kite is beautiful and huge, maybe you'll lift off with it.
I may need your help. I'd hate to lose it.
yes sure, I'll help you. Can we try to fly my later
Such a nice day outside, I m glad that  we flew a kite
the wind is going at a steady rate, I think we won't have a problem keeping it in the air
Did you remember to bring the string we needed for the kite
Oh no, I think I may have left it at home actually
I guess we can go and get it real quick, before it gets dark
They finally caught on that I lied on my application.
If you had just told the truth, you may still have got the job.
They gave me a project and I bombed it.
Well next time be truthful.
I think I may get fired.
I am sorry to hear this, but you just got that job. What happened?
I lied on my resume and said I know how to make CAD drawings. I do not know how to make CAD drawings.
Oh this is really , bad you should have been honest, they may have trained you on CAD?
It was terrible. The head of the engineering department yelled at me for 20 minutes.
this is not nice. Next time just don't lie on your resume.
I told the boss I could do the job.
Did he give you the opportunity?
He told me to go prove what I could do.
What was the result?
He found out that my resume was full of lies and I did a terrible job.
Oh dear, but it is always better to be honest on the resume.
I really can't understand why Sydney doesn't get a navigation system.
Can't believe she doesn't have one!
Well, I gave her the directions, but she still got lost on the way there.
I supposed we need to tell her, that a navigation system would change her life.
Exactly! They would even help her with her driving. Those things even tell you what lane to be in at a stoplight!
I know. I can't live without mine!
Turn left on the fourth light then right after two lights then right again after the fourth stop sign then left just past the yield but take the second left at the split.
Ok, are you driving?
No, I tend to get lost on my way home.
I never been to your home before, I guess if I put it in my GPS, it shall be alright.
For some reason, GPS do not recognize where I live , so again turn left on the fourth light.....
Oh I think I am already lost
I told you. Just follow the map. Once you see the footbridge, turn right.
I don't get your directions, Kai
Did you see the one with the oak tree on the side?
Yes, I know that. But I still get lost the way.
Just go back and call me. I will guide you.
Okay, I will call you now.
Ah, Sidney is driving me mad! He can't find the directions I gave him to get here.
Did you give him the directions again?
Not yet! I'm tired of trying.
Alright, I guess I could give him the travel directions again.
Ok, thank you, hope he gets it this time.
Stop being so depressed about it.
This aspirin is amazing!
I need some, too. My headache is horrible.
Make sure to take it with food it helps.
Awesome, do you have some on you?
Yes, hold on a sec, just grab it now
Thank you so much!
My headache is finally starting to go away.
What did you take?
I took a couple aspirins.
And that worked?
Yes.  If you are having a headache, I recommend you do that, too.
I do have a headache and will follow your advice.  Thank you!
My head was hurting so much from all the drinking last night.
Did you take anything for it?
Yeah, I took some aspirin.
What about the rest of the guys that went to the party with you?
They all woke up with headaches as well.
Good thing you had extra aspirin for them.
That aspirin worked like a charm.
I could use a couple if you have any left.
You have a headache, too?
Yeah. The concert was great, but so loud.
The five beers you had, probably didn't help either.
Yeah. Next time I'll make sure to have at least six beers.
I'm getting tired of living at home.
well, then, why don't you move out.
I can't afford it, I don't pay rent at home.
You do help around the house though,  don't you?
Not really, I just go to school and do school work at home.
Maybe it would be nice to help them out around the house.
When I went to school, I lived at home, but  didn't have to pay rent.
I had to pay rent and help around the house. It was a lot of work.
I didn't have to help around the house either.
Remy you are lucky to have that opportunity to just focus on school.
I guess I am, yeah.
I am still child,  I don't think I shoudn't pay house rent
Do you still live at home while attending school?
Yes! but I do not help around the house!
This is nice of you, especially that you do not pay rent.
Yes my parents are happy with that.
My sister wants me to bring my mom to the party
Is that going to be a problem?
I just haven't seen her in a long time
I know that's hard, but it's worth a shot to reach out
I think you're right. I'll give her a call tonight
That sounds good. Let me know how it goes
I'll bring our mother to the surprise party.
Great, I've been planning this for awhile.
She'll be really surprised.
Hopefully her heart can take it.
It is her 90th birthday.
I've managed to get our whole family together.
Okay, so I think I have all of the ingredients we need to make dinner.
Wait, did you preheat the oven yet?
No, I did not preheat the oven yet. Thanks for reminding me.
Actually, I can just preheat that.
Thanks, I will also start preparing the vegetables.
And I will start preparing the meat.
Do you need yard work to be done, today.
Yes, I need the grass cut and the bushes trimmed.
I can do that for you for a few dollars an hour, if you like.
Deal, when can you start?
I can start right now.
Alright let me know how long it takes you and I'll pay you a few bucks and hour.
Hey Jesse, I have some work for you if you're interested.
What kind of work?
Just some yard work.
Okay, how much are you paying?
How's five bucks an hour sound?
Can I get a few bucks more?.
Wow, we did so much work today. I have not been this productive in a long time.
So we should treat ourselves. 
I got some cookies.
I will take them but I rather have a giant steak dinner for this kind of work.
Well, the cookies are good for now, we can all go out, once we are done.
Steak it is, unless someone has a better suggestion
I really want to do something nice today.
How about we bake some cookies?
That sounds like a great idea, let's get started now.
Okay great, I will get the ingredients out.
I will preheat the oven.
Okay after we make them we can bring some over to the shelter.
I got some cookies because we have been working hard helping out today
Good, I am starving and need some food.
I don't think we can eat all of them, we should save them for the others.
Yeah, I guess this is a good idea.  Gosh,  they are so good.
I should have got more.
Next time we go to the store, we need to get other food as well.
I think my hard work is finally paying off!
I know you've been working hard in business for a while now.
Yeah, I did. It's my dream to do well in this field.
So what happened?
I just got a promotion from my boss.
Well, sounds like all that work was worth it!
I worked so hard to get noticed.  I finally got a promotion from my boss.
You deserved it.
I hope so, I've given everything I got to this job.
You are being recognized and rewarded for that hard work now.
I've been promoted to a manager position.  I have a lot more responsibilities now.
I know, you can handle it.
I have a plan at work.
What is your plan?
I worked well to get noticed at my place of business and my boss was impressed.
Were you rewarded for your effort?
The boss ended up giving me a promotion.
That is great news.
These kittens are homeless. Someone should after them.
You're right, Cameron. The world needs more people like you.
Hey can you bring me my pack, it has some food in it.
Food for what?
This cat hasn't eaten in months, I bet. I'm gonna give it some meat.
Okay that sounds like a good idea.
There was a kitten under my porch this morning and I gave it some food.
How long was it there?
I heard it early this morning, so it might have been sleeping there all night.
You should adopt it as a pet.
I already have 2 dogs and a cat, I could not afford another one.
Can you take it to a shelter.
This morning before work my new little kitten was so hungry, she was trying to eat my shoe!
Poor thing!  Have you bought her some food?
I had some food left over from when my other cat ran away, but this kitten doesn't like that brand.
So what did you do?  That kitty needs to eat!
I ran to the pet store before work and bought some expensive kitten chow and she loves that kind.
That's great!  Fat kitties are the best kind of kitties!
Look! It's a kitten!
Oh my goodness! Where is it's mom?
I don't see or hear any other kittens.
Do you think it's hungry.
She does look hungry, I'm going to give it some of the meat from my sandwich
We should probably get it kitten milk from the store
this is such a cute kitty, where did you get her from
we adopted her from the shelter last week
Did they have anymore kittens?
they had a few more left, if you hurry, you can get them
let's go right now and we can get one
sounds like a good idea to me
Do you have any bread? I would really go for some right now.
I am afraid not, but we have some flour in the pantry.
Great, let's get baking. I bet you'd like fresh bread, too.
That sure sounds amazing, I'll get the flour.
Thank you. Let me warm up some water for kneading.
I couldn't find any bread in your cabinet. I decided to make some homemade bread for all of us to try!
That's thoughtful of you, what kind of bread did you bake?
Just a regular loaf of sourdough, it's in the oven now.
I'm getting hungry, when will it be done baking?
Give it like 20 more minutes and I'll check on it.
Okay, I can't wait. I'm going to put garlic on my slice.
I had a great recipe for rye bread in my head, I also had the flour on hand, so...
You made bread for everyone at the party!
Yes! And it came out of the oven hot and delicious!
Oh, I bet! What did you serve with it?
Antipasto and extra virgin olive oil and cracked pepper to dip the bread in.
Oh I wish I'd been there!
Hey, you want to make some bread? I could make that recipe you like.
Yeah! Sounds great.
Awesome, I'll get started.
Do I have everything you need?
Umm...yep, looks like I'll use the rest of your flour.
That's fine! I'll run to the store, it is just around the corner.
Did they follow me?
Did who follow you?
I was walking over here when I saw a group of punk kids looking at me. I just tried to stare them down to seem intimidating.
Did it work?
I broke eye contact after a minute because the situation was just so stupid. But then they started to get up and move toward me so I ran.
I don't see anyone menacing around the house, but I'll let you know.
I'm in trouble
Aren't you supposed to be at work now?
Yes, that's the problem. I can't find the car keys
Oh dear, Carson will not be happy to hear that you lost his keys
Carson will be pissed and so will my boss, when I'm late for work
you can borrow my car if you want
Oh no, where are my keys?
I thought I had given them to you.
No, I don't have them! This is not good at all.
Okay let me try looking in my bag first, and then we can look at your bag.
Okay, I still cannot find them.
I found them!  They were in your secret pocket in your bag.
I had to put a stop to it.
I hate bullies and what they stand for.
Skylar is my friend, so if you hurt her we will have problems.
You' re a great friend to have.
Thanks, so are you.
We should bring Skylar into our group more often.
Skylar was getting bullied by a bunch of girls in the playground.  I went over there to put a stop to it.
Why were they bullying her?
I didn't really care.  I told them they need to stop harassing my friend.
How did it go?  You are a big guy.  You can be pretty intimidating.
I do not tolerate bullying anywhere.  It's just not good.
No, it isn't.  I am happy you stood up for your friend.
I won't allow anyone to bully Skylar ever again!
You are a true friend Jordan, and Skylar is lucky to have you as a friend.
I hate that the girls bully her, just because she is overweight.
Kids are just so insensitive these days.
Well, I am not going to stand by and watch, I will teach those kids.
Be gentle on them, Jordan.
I hate living with my parents, they drive me mad.
I heard Austin offered you a job at her firm, did you accept her offer?
Yes, I sure did! I start there Friday. In a month time,  I'll have enough money to move out.
You must be very excited to get out of there.
You know I am. Plus I will have my own place and a job. Austin is a great friend.
She is very generous as long as you keep working hard, and show you care about what you do.
I got some really good news today, Austin hired me.
That is great!  When do you start?
I'll be starting next Monday, I am really looking forward to making my own money.
Just don't spend it all when you get it.
No way, I plan on saving up for a deposit on an apartment.  I need to get out of my parent's house.
I know what you mean, it is nice that they can be a safety net, but having your own place brings so much freedom.
I want to move out of my parents' house, as Austin offered me a position, I can finally do that now.
What will you be doing?
It's an accounting job with a big firm.
Does Austin have connections?
He knows one of the principals.  He thinks I'll get the job.
It pays to have connections.
I was trying to grab Casey's hands to hold them, but she pulled them away.
She's probably want to.
That's what I thought so I stopped trying.
It's no big deal.  People don't always want to hold hands.
She's usually into it.  She grabs for my hands sometimes.
You wait for her to initiate then.
Hey I'm sorry but I ordered some food off the menu and I want to eat them by myself today.
Why do you want to eat by yourself?
I had a rough day at work, and need some alone time during my lunch.
Ok. Let's talk about it after you've rested.
Thank you. See you later.
The food I want is not in the menu.
What do you want to eat?
Have ordered the waiter to get me Grub Hub.
Okay, but what I ordered is different.
I insisted on having mine differently 'cos I want to eat alone.
Okay then, not a problem.
Hey can you reach the Snickers bar from the bottom?
The chocolate is stuck on the bottom part of the dispenser.
Can you reach in and grab it from where you are.
Hey, please don't push my fingers through that opening.
Oh, sorry Casey, I was being too overanxious for the chocolate.
Thanks, I got it now and we are good.
This sounds funny but I'm pushing Casey's fingers into the opening.
Yes it did look funny. What were you doing?
I'm trying to get my purchase out of the vending machine.
Those vending machine have been causing some trouble for everyone for years now.
Imagine if you had a penny for every time you heard someone trying a vending machine.
You'd be Bill gates.
I had to make sure that Austin had a great education.
What was wrong with the one he is attending?
The school he was attending is terrible.
What makes the school so bad?
It's like the faculty have lost hope, and just don't seems to care.
I've seen that happen and it's very sad.
It didn't take much convincing for me to get Austin to check out this school.
Was there something wrong with the school your cousin was attending?
It has a bad reputation. He is too smart for that school.
Does he want to go to the new school as well?
Yes, Austin was very excited to go to a better school.
This is good. You are a good cousin to look out for him like that.
I love to use my bike instead of my car.
It's a good idea because it is environment friendly.
That's true. I just need to remember to lock my bike before I enter the store.
Oh yes! You're doomed should you forget.
It will be gone quickly.
You are right about that.
I've already had one bike stolen this year so I got to make sure to protect this one.
Where are you right now?
I'm at the Tri-Rail getting ready to get on the train.
You're not bringing your bike with you?
No, I'm going to lock it up here.
I hope it's safe for you until you get back.
I'm glad I got there, but then I needed to lock my bike.
Yes, it would be good,  you don't want to lose that.
Yes, so I locked it up quickly and moved on.
That's awesome! Sounds like a great plan to me.
Thanks! It worked for that purpose.
Yea, I'm glad you were able to get it all locked up.
I hear you need some help.
That is right I need my gutters cleaned.
I think I can do that for you.
I don't have much money though.
Maybe you can make me a lunch.
Yes, this should be great. Let me know what you like
I am going to give you some great service because you are unable to clean the gutters yourself
That will ne so great. Thank you so much
Here is the piece of advice
I am listening
Overall you need to watch out more, because there are a lot of bats. They can get into gutters and they can get in the way of your cleaning.  I can do this type of service for you if you like
yeah, so I should use the scraper to scoop them out instead of the rake it?
I really want a new roommate.
Oh, I thought you were good friends with your roommate Alex.
Yeah, but Alex has been living in my house for a year now, and he doesn't have the best habits.
Does he snore or something?
No, but he's incredibly messy, and he makes tons of loud noises pretty much all the time.
I had to kick Alex out of the house today. I can't live with the guy anymore...he's so messy.
Can't you make him clean up after himself?
I've tried and tried, but he doesn't care.  He's so noise...he talks loud, plays loud music and tv programs, even his video games are  loud.
I think I understand. I probably would have done the same thing.
Alex is a terrible roommate.
Which house rules did he break?
They are loud and messy at all hours.
Do they at least pay their share?
Well, they think paying their share gives them the right to behave like that.
Maybe you should withhold your share to pressure him.
We drew turkeys in class today for Thanksgiving Day.
Oh how cute! Did you have them trace their hands?
Of course, we did, it's tradition. One of my students was having troubles so I helped trace her fingers.
You're such a great teacher. Did hers come out well?
Yeah it came out great. She was super excited to take it home and show to her parents.
It's probably on their refrigerator as we speak.
The kids in my preschool class are so cute.
What was the lesson today?
We were doing finger tracing projects, my student Robin was having trouble so I helped her.
They're lucky to have you as their teacher.
Why do you want me to face you?
Because I want to see your face, especially when I tell you something.
Okay and what is that?
I'm glad you've got your arm around me.
Is something wrong?
I am not feeling too well.
Cameron and I have been making up a new dance.
Great, how is that going?
Well, we have been having some troubles. I had to kind of move Cameron around and get her into position.
What do you mean?
I just had to physically turn her around and grab onto her back to show her how I wanted her to move.
It sounds like you guys have a lot more work to do.
Excuse me, I didn't know I was that close to you.
that's ok, I did not realised, I was that close either.
thank you for understanding.
Not to worry, there was no harm done. I took it as a friendly touch.
Yes, I feel the same way about it.
nice talking to you, maybe we can talk again soon.
I had a big fight with Sydney at work, today.
Why would you fight with a co-worker?
She didn't respond to an email, and I missed a deadline for a project.
Oh, that's terrible. So what did you end up doing?
Well, it turned out the email was in my drafts folder, but I never sent it and it was all my fault. So I apologized.
How did she respond to your apology?
You know that I have a huge crush on Kendall.  I got her to go to the movies with me.
That's great, how did it go?
We had a great time.  I got up the courage to put my arm around her during the movie and she didn't mind it.  Then we went for a bite to eat.
That's a good sign for sure!  Where did you go to eat after the movie?
We went to Applebees.
Let me know about your next date with her!
I hope you like this movie, your mom said you love scary movies
I loved scary movies ever since I was a kid, and they are my favorite
something about them just really appeals to me, I guess
well, I guess we have this in common
Whew, what a game.  That was a good one.
Do you realize how long you have been playing?
No, not really. Time fly's when you are having fun.
Well, you must be having a lot of fun.  You have been at it for hours.
Oh my, really?  It doesn't feel like it at all.
Yes, Taylor you have been playing pinball for two hours.
I wouldn't be too sure about that move
Oh stop, you've never beat me before
Ok did warn you
Do you think you can beat me
Yes, I do, watch me
Oh wow,  where did that come from
I could tell what my opponent is going to do.  He's so predictable. I've been studying his every move.
That gives you an advantage.
I think so.  I've been winning against him.  I've spent hours studying his past chess games online.
Your opponent sounds like an accomplished player.
He's the top ten in the nation.
You must rank up there, too, if you are playing against him.
All I can see are stars.
You better stay down if you know what's good for you.
I want to continue but my legs aren't working.
I will drop you again punk.
I can't move, so I am giving up.
 I take the win this time
I had to go to the hospital after I couldn't even get up.
Were you in a terrible accident?
I was punched so hard in a fight.
You should avoid fighting like that.
The fight came to me, and couldn't be avoided.
I've gotten into three fights since I was a kid. This is your third fight this year.
I am so burned out from work but I really want to get the special gift for my boyfriend
What do you have in mind?
I was thinking a high end MacBook. They run about four grand.
 You must be in love !! To get such expensive gift for him
Not really, but Bob is so good to me. He's done so much for me.
You know Bob is married and has a line of affairs all over town. He does so much for so many.
Sorry I can't make the dinner party, I have to work Friday night
I didn't know you worked in the evening hours
Usually I don't, but I have been working a second job for a few months now. I needed to save some money
What are you saving for?
My boyfriend really wants a new gaming keyboard, he has been working really hard so I want to buy it for him
Aww that is very sweet of you, you are an awesome girlfriend!
This was the toughest fight of my career so far.
They seem like they were bigger than you.
They were definitely bigger than me.
I thought you had to fight people around your weight.
For the weigh in you do, then you can pack on the pounds.
I didn't know that's how it worked.
That fight  on the other night was a hard one.
You won, so you should be pretty happy.
I know but he was so much bigger than me, and hit like mule.
I guess you wore him down with your face.
Is that so? I just stayed in my corner and tried to make him miss.
I didn't get to my morning run yet again.
What happened? I thought you woke up early and everything!
I did. I got to bed early last night and woke up on time, but I wasn't wearing my running clothes. By the time I found them, it was too late and I had to get to work!
Get the running gears ready for tomorrow, I always get thing ready the night before, it helps
I went to sleep really early last night.
What time did you go to bed?
I fell asleep probably around 7pm.
Did you wake up early?
Yes, I did and I wanted to run and almost left the house without much clothes on.
Good thing you stopped yourself!
I woke up super early this morning, because I went to bed at eight.
Wow! What are you going to do with all your extra time you have?
Well, I plan to go for a run down by the lake, but was naked.
Why don't you just put on some clothes?
Yeah I could do that. But I've always wanted to run naked in public.
Please, don't call me from the police station.
I don't know why I'm up so early.
It's five in the morning.  I'm just starting my newspaper delivery route.
I guess, maybe I'll go for a run.
Hold on!  You're not wearing any clothes.
Ooops, you are right.
You're still half asleep; you better go back to bed.
I am really worried about getting a flat on the highway.
Do you have a spare tire?
Yes, there's one in the trunk.
Well, you're set then.
Not really, I need more spares so I bought a couple others.
There's no room in your car for three spares, though.
I think I have everything ready for our road trip.
Don't forget to bring a spare tyre.
Even better I bought two spare tyres just in case.
two more spares, why?
I don't want the same thing happening again, like it did last time I was on the highway.
I understand. But two tyres is a bit much.
Maybe it's irrational, but having a blowout is one of my biggest fears.
Statistically it's very unlikely to happen. Don't be nervous about it.
I'm trying not to be. But I bought a couple of spare tyres, just in case.
A couple of spare tyres? Doesn't the car already have one?
It does. But I wanted two more, just to be safe.
Sure, if it makes you feel better. But the chances of having a three tyres blowout are basically zero.
I know I already have a spare tyre, but I am so afraid that I'll have a blowout on the highway that I got a second one.
Have you ever had a flat?
Yes, I did last year, and it was really stressful.  I barely made it to the shoulder and then I had to change it myself.
Have you thought about getting roadside assist?
I guess I should do that, then I won't have to worry as much.
You really should. I have it and it's really comforting to know if I have an issue on the road, I can just make one call to get it resolved.
I'm so busy at work right now.
Is it taking up all your time?
Yes Idid, I had a dental appointment but moved it to the next day to make room for an extra client.
At least you'll be earning more with additional clients.
I was having such a hard time with that assignment. I am so glad Sydney helped me out.
What did Sydney do?
She re-wrote the essay for me, that explained everything in more detail.
Don't you think you might get in trouble for cheating?
I as so worn out, so she helped out. I then helped  her with Algebra.
Well hopefully you will get a good grade.
I just finished my essay last weekend.
All by yourself? That is impressive!
I had some help, Sydney edited it to make it more complex and detailed.
That is very kind of him.
Yes it was. I am confident that I will score a good grade.
All  the best with your tests.
My way was vague and simple, at least that's what Sydney told me.  He changed it, so that I can get better grades.
Did that help?
My grades have improved this semester.  I am up by a whole grade in every subject.
That's amazing.  You are putting in the work.
Sydney is a great tutor. He motivates me to study harder.
Sounds like he's a great influence.
My grandma had a really hard childhood in New York.
I can imagine, it must have been difficult to be black living in those times.
Some of the stuff she told me, I can't even repeat.
I'm so sorry, she had to go through those times.
My gammy is this frail little lady. I cannot believe how she fought gangsters and villains in her days in New York until it caught up to her.
I heard she was pushed on to an oncoming subway train and she managed to push the train out to the way.
She does not talk about that, but it's true.
What about the time she flew to the sky to push that big meteor crashing toward Manhattan. That was amazing.
I don't thin it was not real.
She has many struggle in life and I am amazed how she has overcome all these hardship.
Did you look at the concrete?
Yeah. Whose hands are those?
They're Skylar's. I print her hands in the wet cement to memorialize them.
That's great. I bet she'll love looking at that when she's older.
She does, she loves it.
I had a great time this afternoon.
What did you do? Didn't you work today?
Today was a day off for me. I watched a movie.
Did you watch it on Netflix?
No,we went to a theater with Riley's friends.
I am glad you had a good time.
We just got back  from the movies with my friends.
Are they showing any good films?
Yes they did. We really enjoyed the movie and had a great time.
Can I come with you next time.
I've been trying for weeks to get at this game.  I finally beat Carson's personal record.
What game are you playing?
It's this online game.  It keeps track of the highest score. Carson held the record for months.  Almost a whole year.
It must feel good to beat him then.
It's an accomplishment.
We all need to find our purpose.
I beat Carson's personal record today.
I didn't even know you were trying to beat his record.
I have been secretly for weeks. I didn't want anyone to know if I failed.
But you didn't fail. If you worked for weeks you had to succeed. I am proud of you.
Carson is not too happy about it though.
I bet he isn't. That record meant a lot to him.
I accomplished something awesome today
Oh nice tell me about it!
I finally beat Carson's record in the 100 m run
Wow that's great you must be fast
It was a lot of work for sure
I am very proud of you my friend!
I really have what you call a Green thumb.  I can grow anything.
What are you doing right there in the soil?
Right now I'm seeding the soil.  Then with some water, fertilizer, sunlight, and a little time, we'll have a whole field of snow peas.
And they'll grow forever and ever and feed our families?
Well, with the right care every season, we can grow snow peas and we can grow other stuff like beans, potatoes, and corn.
If you plant a sesame seed from a hamburger bun, can we grow a hamburger tree?
these plants have turned out really well
I love the colors of the roses
I wanted to get s little bit of red and yellows
looks like the company forgot to send you the yellows though
guess I can order some more then
I've been out in the garden, seeding the plants all morning.
It's good to get it out of the way before the sun heats up.
They require tending to every season, to keep the heirloom variety going, but it's a good harvest every time.
You gave me some from last year and I just can't get mine to grow like your do.
It's the fertilizer. You need worm castings throughout your soil, and start each seedling with a little nitrogen fertilizer.
I'll try that next season. It's too late for my little plants this year.
Ok Jan, I need you to pick me up at five, today
 I will
And can you clean up a bit, its a bit messy
Hey,  I invited you to stay at my house
I dont care, remember what I did for you
yeah I know, sorry, I will
I think I need to look for new places to live.
Is Jan that bad?
She is just so controlling of everything I do.
That sucks, I think my neighbors are looking for a roommate.
Can you give me their contact info?
Yeah, I'll let them know about you.
your hands are so soft, how did you keep them soft.
I put cream on every time I washed them.
It's all good.
It helps and prevent them from cracking when it is cold.
do you use any specific brand.
Alex, your hands are so warm.
Well, you were trying to hold my hand. You act like you're interested.
I am
let's hold hands to keep them warm.
your hands are nice and soft.
Thank you
Whoa, your hands are so cold.
Sorry, I always have cold hands for some reason!
Don't you feel well.
I do, it is that my hands are naturally always cold.
Let me hold them in my hands to warm them up.
This is so sweet of you.
Aubrey said my house was dirty
Why did she say that
because he found dirt in my house
Did you clean it up
No, I left it there until later
Hey Aubrey! I hoped you had an enjoyable time at my house for lunch.
Thanks for the invitation, Addison, but I am afraid I won't be coming to your house again.
Oh, really? Why do you say that?
I found that your house had a lot of dirt in it. I feel a bit uncomfortable there.
I'm sorry you feel that way. Would you mind showing me so I can get it cleaned up?
Of course! I would be happy to help.
I'm feeling a little embarrassed right now.
Oh no. Why are you feeling embarrassed?
I invited a girl named Aubrey over to my house for lunch, but it didn't go too well.
I'm sorry to hear about that. If you don't mind me asking, what went wrong?
I tried my best to make the house look good, but Aubrey commented on how she could see dirt in the house.
I can see why that makes you feel bad. You focused your efforts on cleaning but were still criticized.
I just cleaned my house.
I see a little dirt over there.
Oh, I just let the dogs in and they must have drug in some mud.
Yeah, that happens with dogs.
I just can't keep the floors clean.
It's no big deal really.
I can't believe I am back here seeing our old high school play football.
It feels like forever ago, that we were students.
I know, and not much has changed either.
They made the bleachers and concession stands new but that is it.
I remember standing in the front row over there in the student section.
Me too, those were some great times.
Did I miss anything?
No, it just started, this is going to be a great game
I know, I had to be here, better be worth the two hour drive
oh please don't complain, you know you love being back home
I do, we going to hit up Johnny's after
You know it, I actually haven't been there in a month
It's a mummy style to I can stay warm.
My feet and legs always get cramped in that style of sleeping bag.
Really? I've never had that problem.
Yeah, I have to have a box style sleeping bag so I have plenty of room.
And you don't get cold?
No, I put a hot water bottle at my feet every night.
Tomorrow we leave on the big family camping trip.
Oh that reminds me, I have the camping chairs you wanted to borrow in my car.
Great, thanks, I'll grab them at lunch.  I have already bought so much stuff for it.
Yeah, camping with a family involves a lot of supplies, that's why I sometimes like to do solo trips.
You're not kidding, I had to go back to the camping store because in planning for everyone else I forgot to get myself a sleeping bag.
At least now you will have everything, and can just pack up and go for the next camping trip.
I got the longest sleeping bag that they had so that my feet stay warm.
I didn't realize sleeping bags come in different sizes.
They do. With a longer sleeping bag I can put extra blankets inside.
That is smart of you especially if you like lots of blankets.
I do. I've gone camping with a standard size bag and was cold all night.
Well you should be able to get 2 or 3 extra blankets in that long bag.
Don't tell
what are you doing that for
well, what's better than free food
not going to jail it
I won't get caught, if you don't tell
I'm not saying anything
Why are you looking at me that way?
I have been watching you, so you better stop stuffing food in your pocket.
Well, I don't want to go hungry later, And you know I can't afford to buy them.
Why don't you put them in my basket, I can purchase them for you.
How nice of you to do that for me. I promise to pay you back when you can.
That is nonsense. That's what friends are for. Don't you worry about it.
I took bought my friend with me tonight. I hope we both meet someone.
Is she looking to meet someone special?
I know she is tired of sitting home alone every weekend.
I think she'd rather you date her, so she isn't sitting home along.
We are just friends.
Well I think she wants to be more than friends.
Just try to have fun at the dance.
I'm just not really good at talking to people.
Just relax and socialize with people.
How? I don't have good people skills.
Just be like me and talk to somebody you like about the things that you think they are interested about.
I don't think anybody here is interested in anything but looking at their phones.
I took my son to his favorite restaurant for his birthday. He really enjoyed it.
Tell him Happy Birthday for me.
I will. He smiled at me and told me he had a wonderful birthday.
Awww, that makes my heart melt.
I know. My whole heart...I started crying.
Hey, I just celebrated my birthday.
Happy birthday! What did you do?
My parents brought me to dinner at this fancy restaurant.
I'm sure you were sure to thank them?
Of course I did tell them,  I was so happy.
Sounds like a great time!
I took my son out to dinner for his birthday last night.
That sounds like fun. Did you have a good time?
We had a great time. He thanked me a lot, so I could tell he really enjoyed himself.
That's awesome!! it sounds like it was a really nice celebration.
It was. I took him to his favorite restaurant, and we had some good quality time together.
I'm so happy for you. Wish him a happy birthday for me.
I hope you had fun
It was a blast mom, we have been to Jimmys Rib shack in 2 years
well its your birthday, so it was worth the 2 hour drive
and you didn't have to take me and my friends to laser tag, we could have just stayed at home, I know moneys tight
Don't you worry about that, this is your day
you're the best mom
I ordered the special at dinner tonight. It came with all the extras.
Was it good?
It was great but I had no idea they gave so much food there.
Did you bring any home?
Yes, I brought home the rest of the ribs.
Maybe I should come over and help you eat them.
These ribs and side dishes look so good, but I'm so full, I can't even finish them!
Well, you can always put them in a carryout box.
That's a good idea. Waiter! Waiter!
The waiters here are not very kind, it takes forever to get their attention.
I went to that new steakhouse for dinner the other day.  The servings were so big, I couldn't finish all my ribs and side dishes.
I know you can eat a lot, so that must have been an incredible amount of food.
It was, it was delicious.  I high recommend it though.
I'll have to give it a try. What side dishes did you try?
The onion rings, the baked beans and the cinnamon apples.
I can see why you weren't able to finish everything.
Oh it was a tense situation just trying to carry all that water.
How did you have to carry it?
I was concentrating on carrying it by hand, so as not to spill any on the floor.
Did you not spill any in the end?
Yes, I was lucky and I was so focused that I didn't spill a drop.
You are talented and you have such great concentration!
So IU've got my hands tightly cupped, full of water as I make my way across the floor.
Why didn't you use a pot or a cup or something easier?
I was upstairs at the time and didn't have a better option.
You could have gone downstairs and grabbed something to use.
I didn't have the time. I had to act quickly and my hands were the best option.
I guess you did the best you could given your choices.
I spilled syrup on my hands.
Quick, go to the sink and wash it off.
I have gotten rid of the sticky stuff but my hands are still soaked.
Come here and take a towel.
I am focused on the water in my hands and being careful not to drop any on the floor.
You are doing a good job.
Jan was over earlier and helped me out with the others when my mom had a fit.
Is your mom still acting out like that?
Yeah, she's always yelling and scaring everybody. Jan took them outside until my mom calmed down.
Maybe you need to take her to see the doctor, she has been so stressed lately.
I know. Her behavior's getting worse.
My mother was yelling so loud Jan tried to get everyone to go outside to play. I'm so embarrassed.
I'm really sorry . Your mother has a lot of issues.
She is getting treatment, but it is still a problem. My dad just ignores it. But at least she is not hurting anyone. She is just loud.
That is really bad for you to have to deal with.
It's ok I'm kind of used to it.
I really love to eat mom's pie.
And your sister Sydney also knows you like her pie.
I could eat her pie all night.
So Sydney asked your mom if you could eat more of your pie?
Yeah I really wanted want to munch on that pie.
Your mother loves it when you eat her cherry pie.
I wanted more of my mother's pie so I asked my sister Sydney to ask it for me 
And did she manage
Yes, she asked for the apple pie
Did she get you a big slice?
Of course!
Well done
I really cannot wait to go home and read my book!
Awesome, what book are you reading?
I am currently reading Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets!
Wow, what a classic, how do you like it so far?
It is fantastic, I just cannot get enough of it.
I already read that and I found the ending to be fantastic!
I love reading so much.  I always read a few chapters every night before bedtime.
That's why you are a writer.
I don't know where I would be without books.  They were my friends when I was growing up.
Did you have any siblings?
I am the only child.  I had my books and toys.  They were my world.
You have such an active imagination.
I am so excited to read the new book coming out by our favorite author.
Me too! I just purchased the book, do you want to read it first?
Oh my goodness, thanks! I am going to go home and read some chapters.
Sounds like a plan.
I will read some chapters every night as usual.
Tell me how you like the book when you are done.
I really love reading books.
Are you currently reading anything right now?
Yes, right now I just started a new book by my favorite author.
How do you have time to read all of these books?
I try to set aside some time to read a few chapters every night.
Do you have any books that you could recommend?
The thing that really relaxes me is going home after work and reading a few chapters.
What book are you currently reading?
I am reading a great series by M.C. Beaton with a protagonist named Agatha Raisin.
What genre is that?
It is mystery; Agatha Raisin is an amateur detective in England.
Is it a little like Miss Marple?
No one liked the cookies I made!
Really? What type of cookies were they?
They were lemon drop and ginger. I think I might have used too much ginger maybe?
I've never heard of lemon drop and ginger cookies. But lemons are kinda sour. I think people expect cookies to be sweet.
Oh, that's true, I wasn't thinking about that. Maybe they just weren't expecting the sour?
I think that's probably it, although you should probably ask someone who actually got to taste them...
My friends didn't like my cookies
I heard them saying that you added too much flour into the batch
Oh, I just followed the recipe my mom gave me
It shows here the recipe is scuffed and the number shows four instead of a one
well I guess that could explain things
Well I'm glad we figured it out
Jessie asked me the time but I don't have a watch.
What did you do? Did you tell time by the sun?
Well, we gave it a shot.
That must be hard when you don't know what you're doing.
And we didn't, so we just asked someone else.
I don't know why you tried that.
I had to make it home by 6PM so I could cook dinner for my family but didn't know the time
Yeah, you never bring your watch with you.
So I thought in that case it's better to take a look at my phone. Surely that can function as a clock/watch.
But you left that at home too?
What? How could you know? People practically live with these things now a days.
I'm sure you could still spend that nice day looking at the sun and the scenery. And I know in the end you used the sun to get anc estimate of the time.
So Cameron finally met my dad last night.
Oh yeah, how did that go?
It went really well. He of course hammed it up and she thought he was hilarious.
Okay, that's great news!
Yes I am glad that she is becoming more engrained in my life.
I am very happy for you!
I just got back from the store and unloaded the groceries from my trunk.
How often do you shop?
These days I only shop once every couple of weeks.
Did you get everything you needed?
Not really.  Whatever I couldn't find, I'll try to buy online.
I shop online exclusively now.
I think we got everything we need for the week
you can probably take your mask off now
Oh, I guess I just got in the habit of wearing it all the time.
I do the same thing sometimes too
habits can be hard to break I guess
I just got back from the store and unloaded the groceries from the trunk of the car.
What did you buy ?
Just enough groceries to last the month. I'm going out of town next week.
That's nice. We were running low on food.
This load should last us a while.
So, where are you going next weekend?
Do you want a taste of my pipe?
No thanks, man. I don't smoke ever, remember?
That's right. I always feel like I need a good smoke to ease the tension.
That makes sense I guess.
I love this pipe, I actually got it as a gift.
Oh right, I remember your grandfather had given it to you years ago.
I had such a nice day yesterday.
What did you do?
I was sitting on the bench, puffing my pipe, blowing smoke from my lips but the weather was glorious.
That sounds so cool.
I learnt a new trick to blow smoke from my lips yesterday when I was sitting on the bench puffing on my pipe
Woah man where did you learn to do tricks with the smoke like that
You won't believe me
come on tell me please
my grandma actually taught me
no way, how do you make those circles so perfect
Ugh, I met the rudest person today.
What happened?
I was sitting on the bench in the park smoking my pipe when some lady came up to me and started scolding me about how I shouldn't smoke around others.
Wow! Was there even anyone else around?
No! If there was I would have moved, but there was almost no one in that area of the park.
That's wild. If she didn't like you smoking she should have just stayed away
I hope you like the present I gave you for your birthday.
I loved it. But I thought I told everybody no gifts.
I know. But I still wanted to give it to you since it would motivate others to do the same.
That's really sneaky of you. But I appreciate it.
I hope you remember this when it's my birthday.
I figured you had some other motives for it.
I know it's the special time...
Lunch break? The spring break? Sorry I just need a break.
No silly, your birthday! So I got you this 1 week getaway trip to the Bahamas! We can go together
Wow Bailey, I don't know what to say, I'm shocked, and to do it in front of the whole class, way to set the stage...
You bet, expect a lot of good presents attempting to stack up to mine, they can't but they'll try.
Thank you, you're the best friend anyone could dream of!
I was in a gift-giving mood this past week!
Were you handing out presents like there's no tomorrow, Bailey?
Yup! I gave one to my friend for her birthday. Lots of others were going to give her presents too, but I was first!
Haha, I bet she appreciated your generosity.
I'm sure she did.
Now...where's my present, hmm?
I made sure I gave him a great birthday gift.
You are always really good about giving gifts.
Thanks. I try hard to show my friends I care, plus he is a great friend, everyone should want to give him something nice.
He is a good friend. I will have to make sure I let him know how much I appreciate his friendship.
I am sure he would appreciate that.
You are right. I need to be more attentive to my friends.
I've lost eight pounds of fat and put on three of muscle using a combination of long runs and weights in the run-up to the marathon.
I hope you're not doing too much.
About two, two-and-a-half hours each day now. The marathon is in two weeks, and I'll slow down after it's over.
How do you feel?
A little tired today, so I'm resting tomorrow.
Good. Rest is a necessary part of conditioning.
This marathon got me all in shape.
You look great, how often have you been working out?
Every day, I have been exercising for this marathon every day.
That is amazing! You are very committed.
Yes, this one means a lot to my family.
Great, I will be there to cheer you on for sure.
I feel so badly for Cameron. Losing a parent is one of the most difficult things to go through.
It sure is. I had a very hard time when my parents passed.
Me too. Watching Cameron try to cope is breaking my heart.
All you can do is offer support, if she wants it.
I sent her some flowers, too. I didn't know what else to do.
It's an expression of your sympathy. It was a good thing to do.
I've sent Cameron some flowers.
I did it too! I hope they cheer Cameron up, she must be so down after her mom passed.
I also sent a note with the flowers
It's hard to write something decent on these notes, isn't it? Mine says, Get better, Love Quinn. Oh my god, I didn't know you sent the flowers too! I hope Cameron will feel better
I knew she loves roses, so I bought the bouquet as soon as I saw it.
My friend Cameron mom was killed by a drunk driver 2 days ago, I just feel so sad for her.
What happened?
She was driving on 9th street and he hit her head on.
Is there anything that I can do to help.
I sent her favorite flowers to her, and went go see her.
All you can do is be there if she wants to talk and help her to go through this time.
I hope Cameron is doing okay.
I think she is doing okay, given the circumstances.
I was so sorry to hear about her mom.
I am sure she knows, and she appreciated the flowers you sent.
It's the least I could do.
She only needs to know you’re there for her.
The fight between me and Jesse got really bad.
What was the fight over?
The fight was over someone we both liked.
Did you get hurt?
Yes, Jesse cut my finger.
That's awful, I hope you have a speedy recovery!
It was nice to finally get to talk to my brother.
It seems like it's been a while since you've both talked.
It has. We weren't always close to each other.
So what did you guys talk about?
We just shared stories with each other. I think it really made us grow close because of it.
I'm glad to hear that.
My brother and I have been getting a lot closer as time goes on.
What do you think has changed?
Well when we were younger we never really talked, but the older we get the more stories my brother shares with me and we grow closer.
I am glad you have been able to build that relationship with him.
I am really glad too because it feels good to have that connection.
I would love to have a close sibling relationship. You are very lucky
I wasn't always close to my brother, you know?
Oh really, what drew you guys closer?
Spending time together and telling him stories from my life. That made a big difference.
That's good to hear. I like that.
I was just at the grocery store to get some fruits.
Did you drive the car or did you ride the bike?
I took the bicycle because my friend drove the car that we shared.
At least you got the parts for lunch.
I sure did. When my best friend comes home, I can use the  carto buy dinner.
Seems like the sharing is working.
I needed some fruit for lunch today, so I had to tell my friend I was going to take the bike we share
I see, does your friend use the bike to go to work?
Yeah, I had to be back before he had to go to work, luckily the store is only like a 10 minute ride away.
Sounds like the sharing works well with your work schedule.
Indeed. Do you also use a bike to go to work now?
I usually drive
I had to ride my bike to the store today. My friend had the car.
The store is not too far away for a bike ride.
No, it was actually kind of nice. I needed some fruit for lunch so I went.
You should buy a lot of fruit from a farmers market. It's better and helps the locals.
That's a great idea. I will do that next time.
My friend made an appointment at my salon to cut her hair.
Yes, you said she reserved it online.
Yeah, the online booking is working pretty well recently.
Are you all booked in?
Depends on the week. Are you considering getting your hair cut?
I would like all of my hair completely shaved off.
I hope my friend liked the haircut I did for her today.
She said she never had short hair before.
She'll be a lot cooler. I'm happy she set her appointment with me.
Well, you are her friend.
I think she'll love my work.
Yeah, I love you work too.
Tracy is making me clean the kitchen.
Is she giving you any money for it?
Not that I know of.
That sucks. I feel bad for you.
Tracy made me clean the kitchen the other day.
That doesn't sound so bad.
You don't know how messy the kitchen was! It took me a few hours to finish.
It only got that messy because you procrastinated cleaning the kitchen sooner.
I cant believe Tracy made me clean the kitchen after all the work I did around the house
But she was tired and said she didn't feel like doing it
that's no excuse because I was tired too.
I heard Tracy has really bad backache and it really hurts when she moves
 I guess if she cleans the kitchen up tomorrow we'll be even then
I'm sure she will
I tried on my mom's shoes the other day.
Oh Sydney, you're so silly.
Yeah I love playing dress up and looking in the mirror.
It really is fun.
I love fashion and fantasizing.
It's great to have an active imagination.
I love dressing up in my mom's clothes.
What do you like wearing the most?
I like her shoe's, I can tip tap toe in them in front of the mirror.
You should ask your mom for your own pair of shoes to do that.
I was dancing in front of the mirror the other day.
What were your wearing?
I put on one of mom's dresses and her blue shoes, the ones you like.
Did you take any pictures?
My friends from work invited me to a basketball game this weekend and I decided to join them.
Really?  I didn't think there were any basketball games right now.
Yeah, it was just a high school team that decided they were going to play a practice game outdoors.
You missed seeing sports enough to agree to go?
Yup, I'm been going through withdrawal without seeing any sports.  We all social distanced and wore masks.
Hopefully sports will be getting back to normal before too long.
I accepted my friend invitation to go to the game earlier today.
How does it feel to plan to go to the game after all this time?
Feels good, really looking forward to the game
I also went to see a football game last week--us versus Southport.
Oh, that's a big one.
It was great!  I'm glad I went.
You should have seen Alex when she opened the box!
What did you do, buy her a present?
Yes. I told her I had a surprise, and gave her a box with a ring inside.
Wow. I didn't know it was so serious!
Oh, it's not an engagement ring, but kind of a pre-engagement ring.
Still, that's a big step for sure.
Hey! I just got a gift for Alex.
What kind of gift did you get?
I got Alex a ring.
Wow! that's a fancy gift.
Yeah I suppose it was time to get something nice for Alex. I've already told her I have a surprise
You are such a nice friend to Alex.
That snowstorm the other night was something else wasn't it?
I know! I was glad I was at home and not out in the middle of it!
I actually was out. I was over at Sydney house and she insisted I stay.
Well that was probably a good idea. It was terrible outside!
I didn't really want to, but eventually I listened and now I guess hearing from you, that I made a good choice.
Absolutely it was terrible outside!
I really needed to get back home yesterday, but there was a terrible snowstorm.
Yeah, the snowstorm was crazy.
I know, but I needed to attend to something the day after.
I think Sydney suggested you stay and watch the weather for sometime, so you didn't have to take that risk. Did you stay?
Well I just wanted to get my stuff the day after  done as soon as possible, so in the end I left.
Looks like you were fine though.
I had to drive home in the middle of the snowstorm, I couldn't just leave my grandma all alone.
But Sydney didn't want you to go, right? She said it was too cold, and not safe. 
All the more reasons for me to leave.
But you couldn't even see three feet ahead of you in that blizzard, there's no way you could drive.
I went slow, Sydney didn't change my mind about this.
And so you drove... Were you okay?
I had drive home earlier, it was getting late.
But the snowstorm was terrible out there.
I was fine, I know how to drive in the snow.
Didn't Sydney asked you to just stay over?
Yeah, but I don't want to put people out by doing that.
I swear that would be okay.
I had never rode a horse before.
Don't worry. Robin will let you ride their horse.
I'm scared.
She will teach you, Lee.
I'm a bit scared!
You shouldn't be.
I rode a horse over the weekend. It was so fun.
Haha, that's cool. Where did you do that, on farm?
Yeah, a horse farm that my friend Robin owns. I rode it around an area they have there.
Did it gallop or run or just like a trot?
It went in a quick trot. Couldn't go too fast, though.
Robin took me out to her farm yesterday.
Did you get to ride one of their horses.
Yeah, the white one, I had never rode a horse before.
She must really like you, she never lets anyone ride him.
She told me the same thing.
I heard from Bailey there were cookies, but I don't see any.
Well, it turns out Bailey ate them all before you got here.
What?! All of them.
It was a stressful day and she said he needed some cookies.
All right, let's bake some more.
That's a great idea.
Bailey baked cookies for me so I hear.  She ate all the cookies before giving them to me.
You mean Bailey baked cookies for herself.
That's what I said.  I teased her with, Where are my cookies?
I'll buy you some from the bakery.  I don't bake.
That's okay.  I was just having fun with Bailey.  It's the thought that counts.
How sweet of Bailey to think of you when she bakes cookies.
I found the dress you thought you lost last night
where was it? I was looking everywhere for it?
I found it in the thorn bush that you were walking past
I think I really need to stop drinking so much beer when I go out
that is probably a really good idea
I brought Remy something earlier.
What did you bring have Bailey? A present?
Better! It was the dress that she lost the other night.
She's been looking everywhere for that thing. She lost it when we were fooling around on the way home from dinner that night.
Yeah, I remember! I found it on a thorn bush in front of a house down the street. She must have tossed it in there.
I hope it isn't torn.
I have to stop by Remy's on my way home.
Why?
I need to return this dress to her. We went skinny dipping last night and the cops showed up. When we ran away carrying our clothes, her dress got caught on a thorn bush.
So Remy had to walk home naked?
No. I gave her my t-shirt and she had her underwear. It was dark so no one saw.
You guys got lucky. You could have been arrested for indecent exposure.
I got a top award for sales again this year.
Congratulations! you got one last year too didn't you?
I have gotten top sales each year but only one award. I got raises the other times.
Wow you must make a lot of money for them.
I do the best sales numbers so the company is good about my raises.
Congrats again then. I guess you can take me out to celebrate!
I’ve been working so hard on sales this year.
I have seen you and know you’ll get promoted pretty soon.
I’ll take it if it comes with a great pay raise.
I usually get a pay raise every year.
Then will have to celebrate for sure.
Drinks on you right?
Today I sat near Cameron.
Did you know each other?
No, I had to introduce myself.
I thought you knew Cameron already
I can't believe we have not met before either.
I know, right? You share the same social circle and everything.
I don't think I knew Cameron, although  I met him around other places
right, I always see you at the same parties but I don't think I have ever seen you talking
I am glad we had a lot of time to get to know each other.  It is going be great getting to know Cameron
I look forward to going for coffee with you both soon then
Great idea, let's do that
yeah, lets' do that
Jan told me something she has not told anyone else
Oh wow, we all have things that we have been holding in for a long time
I appreciate Jan telling me, it was a very strong thing to do
Jan must trust you Cameron,
I also trust Jan
T What a nice friendship you have Cameron
You won't believe it, but I had a genie pop into my room.
Yeah, right. Let me guess: it gave you three wishes.
It gave us one, but we made it into multiple wishes.
Ok. I'll bite. How did you do that?
Well, we wished for lots of pretty things and a few exciting things.
Awesome. Next time include lots of money too!
This computer looks so epic.
Carson, I think this computer is actually broken.
Oh no, it is?
Yeah, don't pay for it.
Okay, I will put the cash back into my pocket.
Let's just get out of here. I don't want to be in a store that sells a broken computer.
I was about to pay with cash, but then I noticed the computer was broken so I pulled my money away.
Where were you?
I was at the electronic store at the outdoors mall.
Did you end up buying a computer?
I ordered one online.  It should get here by tomorrow.
Hope this one arrives in one piece.
I almost bought a broken computer.
I told you that local shop tries to cheat you.
I put the money away when I noticed this small line on the screen.
The monitor already has dead pixels.
That was it. It was about three inches.
Was it running lengthwise or horizontal?
As I wanted to buy the computer, I saw that it was broken
Have you paid for the it?
No! I pulled my money away when I noticed it.
That is just the right thing to do.
I can finally sit back and watch some TV.
You’re all done for the night?
Yeah, I just finished up washing the dishes.
I hate washing dishes.
As long as it’s not big pots and pans I like it.
Then you’ll love my house as I have a sink full waiting on you.
Yea so I made dinner then I washed and cleaned everything.
Yes that is what happens after you cook dinner, you have to clean.
I hate cleaning, that is the worst part of the dinner process.
Haha I agree that part is horrible.
Wow, that was a good salad!
Yeah, I'm glad you had me over for it.
Are you finished eating?
Yeah, dinner was amazing, thank you.
Alright, I'll take your plate then so I can rinse the dishes.
Thanks again.
I'm so excited for cross country season to start.
I didn't know you joined the athletics team .
Yeah I just signed up. I can't wait to start racing!
You're so competitive! I don't like competing. I'm always afraid I'll make a fool of myself.
You should give sports a try. You might be surprised at your abilities. I like outdoor sports the best.
Maybe I'll learn how to play tennis. I do like being outside.
I had a new patient today, he was a young boy.
Was it his first time at the eye doctor?
Yeah, he was fascinated by everything.
What was his favorite part?
He liked the part where I gave the vision test and exposed the number in the screen that he was looking at.
Little kids find everything fascinating.
I gave a vision test today.
I was it?
It was a young boy, and I exposed the screen in front of his eyes to a number.
Had he done this before?
Yeah.
It's very easy.
So, I was giving an eye test to a young boy.
As you often do.
Anyway, I showed him the number 2 and he said Z.
That's kind of funny.
I didn't know whether to count it as right or wrong.
I'm sure you figured out whether he could see by the end of the test.
I gave a vision test today
I hope it wasn't a disgruntled old person
Not this time, it was a little boy
I hope they took it well
They did, the kid had great eyesight when I showed the numbers
You're good at your job
I barely slept last night
Any major reason?
I could hear everything the neighbours were doing. They were just so loud
I thought you moved to your own apartment because you needed peace and space from people
I thought so too until I discovered the walls were so bare and thin . It's like living in the same house with the neighbours
I'm sorry to hear that. You should have checked before you moved in
I need to go to the swap meet. Do you want to come?
Oh sure, I love the swap meet! What are you buying?
I need some pictures to hang on my walls. My new apartment looks so bare.
Do you know what kind of pictures you want?
I think just some art prints for the living room. Maybe some Kandinsky's or something. And some black and white urban photographs for the bedroom.
That's a great idea. I love black and white photographs.
I love the new apartment but I didn't know the walls would look so bare.
Will you hang picture?
I guess so, or mirrors or just put up a bookshelf.
That sounds like you have some good ideas.
I didn't realize I didn't have a lot of wall based furniture when I moved in.
Now you can go shopping!
Watching the news make me so anxious.  It seems like there is always something horrible happening in the world today.
Yes Jan, it seems like every time I turn on the television something bad is going on.
All of this news about the corona virus is making me sick. I can't even watch the news before dinner because I lose my appetite.
I know the feeling.  Sometimes I go days without watching the new because I don't want to get upset.
Yeah, it is kinda like the more you know, the more upset you will get.
I agree with you 100 percent.
I loved that new show yesterday.
Great, when did you watch it?
Last night, after dinner.
Why did you wait until after dinner?
Because I'd lose my appetite if I watch it before dinner.
I understand. That makes sense.
I wanted to watch the evening news, but I decided to wait until after dinner so it didn't ruin my appetite.
I hear you.  There never seems to be good news these days.
It's very depressing. I want to keep informed but it really puts me in a bad mood.
Hopefully we'll see a turn around with the virus soon.
I sure hope so.  Every time I think it can't get worse it does.
Keep the faith, my friend.  It's all we can do right now.
It is so nice to see people I know in this area
It most definitely is
yeah and I like how they are so cordial and friendly with me
Yeah that is a real treat to have that isn't it
Right.  I am so glad to have you as well in my life as a friend
Thank you
I was nervous to give the acceptance speech.
You really deserved the award.
It was a great honor to get it, I was happy to accept it on their behalf.
Now you'll be remembered forever.
I think I'm going to  thank them for granting the award.
It's a great honor for you and them.
It is indeed.
I like you are doing this is for them.
They would do it for me too.
I hope so.
I am so proud of myself for giving the thank you speech when they were granted this award
what did they give them an award for?
it was for selling the most candy bars in the third quarter
wow, that is amazing. I bet you also sold a ton of them
I sold many, but they got the award granted because they sold just under a million candy bars this quarter
I cannot believe I made it up on stage at the price is right.
We’ve been watching this show for kids and imagine this moment.
I can’t even explain it as I’ve had it in my head but it’s nothing like this.
Did you win a prize?
I can’t see anything as I had to sign an agreement.
Come on I’m not gonna tell anyone.
This show is super cool.
Yeah I thought you would enjoy it!
Yeah! Thank you for buying these tickets man.
It's no problem dude, there's more to the surprise though.
What do you mean?
They're calling you up on stage!
It totally surprised me when they called me up on the stage.
Wait, I thought that you were part of the audience.
I thought so too.
So what did they call you up on the audience for?
They wanted to give me an award!
That must have been such an honor!
Did you finish your story for the paper? I think the drafts were due today.
Yes, but I don't think my story is that great. I wrote about the lack of stop signs in the neighborhoods by the school. What is your story on?.
I wrote about how the local plant is releasing toxic waste in the water and poisoning the drinking water for the surrounding neighborhoods.
Wow, I bet that story will get a lot of attention and sounds like something that really needs to be addressed. The plant will probably be upset and deny it though.
I'm not too worried about the plant fighting my story because I gathered a ton of facts and proof to support my story so they won't be able to deny anything without looking like liars.
Well, hopefully your story gets enough attention to make them do something about the toxic waste they are releasing into the water. I bet you will make a real difference with that story
it's crazy how these plants treat our planet.
I heard they were letting toxic chemicals drip into the drinking water.
Sad to say, its true.
That is such a shame.
I had so much fun at Disneyland.
I'm so glad you enjoyed it.
I did. I still can't believe Aubrey made my dream come true by taking me there with her.
She's know for a long time you've always wanted to go.
It's so sweet of her. I'm gonna do something nice for her as a thank you.
I'm sure she would love that.
I'm finally going to Disneyland. Aubrey said she is going to take me.
That is so nice of her. When are you going?
Next month, I am so excited. It's going to be the best trip ever.
Say hi to Mickey for me.
I will and get you some Mickey Mouse ears too.
I tilted Kendall's head back to whisper my secret.  I told her she can never tell anyone.
Why did you tell her your secret?
Kendall is the only friend I can trust.  We've been through so much together.
Don't your families know each other too?
My mom was best friends with Kendall's mom since their high school days.
Your families go way back.
I really don't want to go to the movies.. That one just looks super boring.
What kind of movie was it?
It's a rom com.. They are all so generic and not funny.
Agreed, you see one you've seen them all.
Exactly! Now if there were a good horror or drama showing I'd be down to go watch!
Yah with covid, it seems like there are no more good movies coming out.
Did you end up going out with everyone to the movies last night
I did, weren't you supposed to come out too.
I was going to, but I thought the movie would be boring.
It was amazing, great story, really good acting, and a bunch of terrific fight scenes.
Oh man, I should have gone, now I feel bad.
I think some people want to go again next weekend they liked it so much, you should just go then.
How did you manage to put my thoughts in a such an elegant book?
It was not me. I have no such talent for the written word.
Then how was this possible? How did manage to write a best seller like this?
Well, let me introduce you to the Autobiographer 3000 by Amazon.
What is that? Its a frightening looking machine. Get it away from me.
It's magic.
I had to teach one of my coworkers how to do the tables today.
Who? Is she a friend?
It's Tracy. She works near me and had a lot of questions so I showed her how I did it.
That's super nice of you Aubrey.
She's nice and new and now I think she gets the assignment.
You are a good person!
I am certain a war is going to start.
Things certainly seem to point in that direction.
I went to war when I was a young man and so should my sons.
How do they feel about that?
They wholeheartedly agreed and I escorted Kendall and Tom to the recruiter's office to serve their country.
I will be praying for them.
Are you boys ready for a war?
Yes, why?
A war will start soon, so be prepared.
I'm ready Austin.
I just registered Kendall and Tom to serve at the war.
How are they feeling about this?
I'm normally a pacifist, but there's a war brewing and it's going to threaten our home country. We all need to do our part to fight.
Did you enlist into the army?
No, I have a disability and they won't accept me. But I did make Kendall and Tom enlist in my place.
Hopefully they don't get hurt and return home safely once the war is over.
I made the inspection for Carson's new home before he bought it.
It is really a great house
yea, I know right?
yeah, it is really spacious and has a great view
yeah I did a thorough inspection and saw it was great quality
Was Carson satisfied?
I have an interview with Entertainment Weekly in an hour.
Another interview? Wow you're so famous now!
They always ask me the same questions too. Who is responsible for your fame? Who made you who you are? Blah, blah, blah.
And what do you tell them?
I tell them the truth! I'm the one responsible. Nobody helped me with anything and I'm proud of that.
Wow that is a refreshing response. I'm sure they'll twist your words though and make you sound like a horrible person.
We are famous now
It is because we wrote our own ticket to fame.
We never had to rely on anyone for anything.
We only relied on ourselves.
I am really proud of us.
I'm so proud of you.
Today I helped another student with the homework
yeah, it looked like he just couldn't figure it out
He just needed to add some numbers up and divined them
oh, it's so easy when you explain it, I didn't know I had to do that either
yea, the instructions were not that clear I guess
well, thank you very much
Good news, all the other students passed Math!
Whoa, nice! I thought they were going to fail for sure.
Yeah, me too. They were having a hard time wrapping their heads around the last project.
I don't blame them. It was a tough one. How did they figure it out.
I helped them out a bit. I took a break from some of my projects to walk them through it since I didn't want to see them fail and get held back.
You're a good friend.
I sleep in my car lately until I get an apartment
I wish you didn't lose the house, it sucks
I smelled so horrible in the office today, everyone smelled it
Did you take a shower?
No, no chance
You can stop by for a shower at my place
Why are you looking at me like that
Bailey, I have to tell you something, I want you to know I'm trying to look out for you
What is it?
Well, you have kind of started to smell, people are noticing
I am so sorry, i was evicted three weeks ago and i haven't been able to shower
Why didn't you tell me I would have let you come stay at my place
I need to find a steady place to shower.
Why don't you shower at home?
I lost my home. I can't keep coming to the office smelling like this.
You can use my shower.
Do you have a spare room that I can sleep in?
Yeah. I can let you rent my spare room for a month or so.
I was so lost and not sure what to do.
What happen to you lately .
I lost my home, I'm smelly and I have no clue what I am going to do.
It will be ok we just need to work this out and see what we need to do for you.
I felt so embarrassed at the office, thought everyone noticed my appearance.
What was wrong with your appearance?
I hadn’t showered in a couple of days because I lost my home and was sleeping in my car.
I am so sorry to hear that Bailey, you could have stayed with me.
Thank you, maybe I will, if that’s ok with you.
Of course, that’s what friends are for.
I think you're aware that I've been trying to expand my knowledge base, right?
I remember you saying something about that. How's it going?
I was having trouble figuring out how to go about it, then I remembered Kendall is teaching a class this semester.
Oh, right! I forgot about that. He was really looking forward to getting back in the classroom, wasn't he?
Yeah, he's missed it. And so I realized I could take his class and that would be really good for me.
That is a good idea. Kendall's the kind of teacher who really will improve your knowledge base.
Kendall was teaching a course at the college.  I took it because I want to learn more about the subject.
What did she teach?
She taught history.
What period?
The civil wars period in American history was the focus of the course.
Did you guys get into political issues?
I am currently taking Kendall's class.
Oh I wanted to try that, how is it?
Kind of dull but interesting at the same time.
What do you mean?
It is just boring material but Kendall makes it fun and interesting.
Oh that's cool.
Did I tell you I had the house to myself last night?
Why was that?
My parents were away on a business trip.
What did you do all night?
Well I was watching TV when I heard a loud thump outside the window. I thought it was a burglar!
Well it's a good thing it wasn't.
hey, what's up?
hey Addison, not much. How are you?
I'm good. You know I was alone yesterday night my parents were away from home for a business trip.
Did you enjoy staying alone?
no, I heard a loud thump outside my window.
Oh.. That's scary.
I can't believe my friend almost spoiled the movie for me
There's nothing worse than spoilers!
I know! I wouldn't have watched it if she spoiled it
I would have done the same honestly
Yeah, well luckily I stopped her right before she said anything
I'm glad you dodged a bullet there!
Can you believe Ash almost ruined the movie for me?
I know, but it was so good and she was really excited.
She should have asked me if I had watched it or not first.
Yeah, she is known for giving away spoilers!
Well, I'm just glad I stopped her before she told me too much.
Good thing, huh?
Yikes!  That was scary!
Hahaha, it was just a prank!
Why would you do that? You know how I get scared.
I wanted to lighten the mood.  Plus Halloween is coming up soon.
Ah, that reminds me, I need to get a costume.
Come with me to the store and we'll find something that works!
Guess what?  I almost killed Jan last night.
Oh my God!  What happened???
Well, I had just got home from work, and as soon as I shut the front door, all of a sudden a monster jumped out of the closet and tried to grab me!
What?  What was going on with that?
It was Jan, she was wearing some stupid scary mask she bought at the costume shop.  It was just instinct, but I pulled my Glock and almost drilled Jan right in the forehead!
What a story!  Doesn't Jan remember that you have that gun?
Jordan gave me a watch for my birthday.
It's a beautiful watch! How did he know what to get you?
At first I had a hard time telling him what I wanted, because I felt guilty that the watch was so expensive.
I can understand why you'd be hesitant to tell him you wanted it.
But after I thought about it, I knew Jordan just wanted me to be happy, so I told him.
This is such a thoughtful birthday gift.
I wanted to tell Jordan something for a while
What did you wanted to say?
I have wanted a thing for a while but I was embarrassed.
And what was that you wanted?
I told him I want a super expensive pair of shoes.
How did he take it, did he get hungry?
The doctor said that I have to go on a diet.
What was wrong with how you were eating?
My sugar level is too high.
Oh, what will you need to cut down on?
I have to stop eating candy and soda.
That doesn't sound very fun.
It's hopeless, I'm never going to accomplish anything in life and I'm going to die a failure.
You got a D in one class, it's not the end of the world.
I tried so hard though, but I'm too stupid and none of it made sense.
You're not stupid, if one way of learning didn't work for you then we'll just have to find one that will.
You'd do all that just to help me?
We're friends, that's what we do, and besides if it'll get you to stop groaning about it then I'd do anything.
I failed the class.
You can always retake the class again.
The learning disability I have just makes it to hard to understand the words.
You just need to find a way of studying that will allow you to learn.
This cake tasted funny.
yeah, Tracy said it has poison in it.
Dude not cool.
Here is medicine.
Give me that!
This will show you!
I went down the wrong job path.
What track did you take?
I took the low road and was always late.
Where did that get you?
I was sacked but later I realized how stupid I was so I found a new job.
Be on time from now on.
The traffic is heavy. I am happy Riley got me this business opportunity, we'll do so well!.
Lets hope you do. But people are funny when you try to sell them stuff.
Well, if I can get one sale for every ten customers then we are golden!
Well, your overly optimistic!
You'll see! People just love what we are selling!!
Well, try pushing the old collection too. We gotta get rid of those items.
I really like the job Riley got me at the mall.
I didn't realize you were having so much fun working as an associate of a department store.
I knew I would love it! Spending a few hours at the mall will do me good.
You are right, I'm so tired sitting at home.
Good! I'll probably give you a visit one of these days.
Awesome I look forward to that.
Yesterday I wanted to just call in sick and go to the concert.
But you had to go tot work yesterday, I saw you there.
I tried to say I got strip throat, but didn't work.
Nice one but I see why it didn’t work.
I was pretty convincing though.
It's a pity though you missed the concert.
Yesterday I called my boss to let him know I was taking the day off,
But your office was super busy yesterday.
Yeah, and I had already made plans for the day.
Well, too bad. You should have asked your boss the day before.
fine, I guess I just need to plan in advance next time.
Great. I see you have learnt something.
I have been working hard on DNA.
That's interesting, what for?
It is part of my job as a scientist.
Sounds like a hard job.
It is, but I love it.
That's great!
As a scientist, taking responsibility is very important.
Yeah, all that sciency stuff can't make any errors, right?
Haha, yeah I have to direct the students and my interns on how to work with DNA, tough I'll tell you.
Heck, I can't begin to imagine.
One error could lead to hours of hard work wasted!
Which is why you need to relax every now and then, let that big brain recover!
I love studying this DNA.
Really? Did you go to school for that?
Yea, I did! I'm honestly really glad that I did and became a scientist!
I hear you! That kind of stuff is cool.
Yea, I really cannot think of anything that I would enjoy more.
I get it! As long as you're into it.
Hey Jesse, I'm getting kind of tired of playing against your friend.
Why is that?
She's just not that good and I beat her every time. I want more of a challenge.
My other friend Madison is a really strong player. I'll ask if she can join us next time.
That's a great idea. Ask her right now.
Okay, I'll text her.
Sorry Jesse but your friend is not a challenge. Every game that we play I have crushed her.
No you have hot you just play more so you have more practice.
She is boring to play against, let's find new players
Fine but you only win because you have no life and all you do is play games.
Jessie's friend and I played against each other last weekend.
That sounds like fun. Who did better?
I beat Jesse's friend at every game we played.
That sounds kind of boring.
Yeah, I got bored with the lack of challenge pretty quickly.
I think I would get bored in that situation, too.
I played a prank on my parents yesterday.
Yeah, what did you do?
I put confetti and streamers all over the house like I was having a surprise birthday party for my dad.
But it's not your dad's birthday until September.
That's the joke!
You worked too hard on a joke that's not even funny.
Wow, this is so cool. They will be shocked.
But Kai, it may not be so funny, confetti is hard  to clean up.
My parents will love it. Trust me!
You mean, they won't trust you being at home alone.
Lighten up bro. Adults need a little fun in their lives too.
Maybe you should have a real party for them instead of a prank.
I played prank on my parents. It was fun.
What did you do?
I put confetti and streamers all over the house.
Sound funny
It is okay to play with your parents at times.
That some love in the family. I like you guys
I went over to Austin's house the other day to play videogames.
What were you guys playing?
We were playing Destiny and when we got to the boss level I was about to die, but Austin helped me out and protected me until I could regain health.
Wo,w that sounds pretty thrilling.
It was super nerve-wracking and I was so glad that I could hold on a finish the level with Austin after his help.
That sounds fun. I have never played that game.
I just fought hard for Austin
What do you mean
I fought for him in a  game called Destiny
Did he live ?
He did but it wasn't easy at all
Austin saved my life today.
Oh my god...what happened?
In a video game, silly. He saved me.
Ha ha. I thought you meant in real life. What game are you playing?
It's called Destiny.
I had to take my little brother to the store because he ripped his pants.
Was he upset about it?
Well, it happened at school so yeah a little bit.
That kind of thing happening in school is awful for little kids.
Yeah he said he got picked on because of it.
Tell him to keep his head up and not to worry about those other kids.
Man, work was so exhausting today.
That's too bad, but your brother seems really happy to see you.
I'm glad to see the little guy after such a long work day.
Do you have any plans involving him?
Yes, I'm taking him to Walmart to get new him pants.
That sounds like some quality time between brothers.
If you need any pants they are on sale at Old Navy.
I do need to get some for my kids for school.
I took my little brother there yesterday after working twelve hours and the place was packed.
Why did you go after such a long day at work?
I promised him that we would go yesterday to get a pair he has wanted for a long time.
You are a great big brother!
I forgot about the book I borrowed.
Is that the book you need to return this afternoon?
Yes I will need to return it this evening. I can just borrow it again because I did not finish reading it.
They are so strict.
It was my fault.
I can borrow it for you at another time.
Here's the book back
What did you think of the ending
I actually didn't get to finish it
Wait, why are you giving it back then
I thought I had it for to long
no keep it until your done, believe me its worth it
I had to recently go in a talk with the police.
What for? Did you do something wrong?
Oh no. I remembered I saw a suspicious vehicle and a man last week around the time that break-in occurred.
Well then you did the right thing going in and talking to police. Did they act like you were helpful?
Yes. They said this gave them a good lead and they may call me again.
Well hopefully they can solve the crime now!
Do you see all the police over there?
Yeah, someone's house got broken into last night.
Oh, I saw someone skulking around that house a couple days ago.
The police might like to know about that.
I'll go tell them.
Hopefully they find the person.
I told Taylor she should go to London.  That's where her boy is.
Is she in love with a London boy?
Most definitely.  She writes songs about him.
That's true love.
She talks about him nonstop.  I know everything about this boy.  She was grateful that I suggested she go visit him this summer.
Have they ever hung out in person?
You know Taylor form Scotland, right?
I do. What about him?
I met him this morning trying to go to London. I gave him directions to London.
I hope Taylor won't get lost.
I hope not. Taylor was happy and expressed his gratitude for all the details I provided.
Then, I am sure he will get there without any problems.
Remind me to not discuss politics in the classroom anymore, Pat.
Why not? What the hell happened?
Well, the class started arguing over socialism. One student threw their book across the room. Another one started marching around like a soldier.
Wow, people sure get up in arms over politics these days. Did they get in trouble?
Of course they did, I sent them right to the principal's office.
Good. They should discuss politics with a level head.
I'm so mad at myself... I just ate an entire birthday cake, and am getting ready to eat a pizza.
Are you ok? That sounds like depression eating. Are you sad your birthday wasn't what you wanted it to be?
Yah I guess that is part of it.
I'm sorry... I'll stay over and eat the pizza with you if you want, that way you don't eat the whole thing?
Yah that would be nice
Sweet! I was craving some pizza anyways
I am happy to say that I have been sober for the past month.
That's great to hear!
I found a group of people online that helped me through my drinking problem.
It's awesome that we can use the internet these days to connect with others.
It is nice. My drinking problem was affecting my job, but thankfully it isn't anymore.
I am so happy for you!
I'm going to get some help for my drinking problem. I found a site online that provides therapy.
I'm so proud of you for making that step. It's hard to make big changes like this.
Yeah drinking was ruining every relationship in my life. It's been terrible.
Well now you can finally turn a corner. If you need someone to talk to I'll be here for you.
Thanks . I will need all the help I can get.
I didn't get any sleep last night. I fell asleep while driving my car.
You're lucky you didn't have an accident.
Almost hit a tree. My car going up over the curb woke me up.
You need to go home and get some sleep. Call off work. They are squeezing you lately.
I know, but I really need this job.
You won't need it if you're dead or, even worse, kill someone else.
I am honestly so tired right now, man.
You need to get some sleep as you get home.
I know, okay where am I taking you again?
Just to my house. Wait, watch out Austin!
Wow that was close, I nearly crashed into that other car.
You need to be more careful! Please don't drive unless you have gotten enough sleep next time please.
I overheard something at Sydney's house and I'm not sure if I should say anything or not.
Uh oh, What did you hear?
Her parents were arguing and talking about getting a divorce!
Whoa. That's serious. I don't know if you should interfere. What if they don't end up getting divorced?
That's just it. I don't want to start trouble, but I don't want her to be blindsided if her parents just split one day.
Maybe you could ask her if her family is doing okay, and mention you heard loud voices while you were there.
I overheard Sydney's parents arguing about a divorce the other day
Oh no, what did Sydney say about it?
Well I didn't say anything to her, I am afraid she will get too upset
I agree, and it's the parent's job to talk with her anyway
I mean I feel bad for her but I don't want her to freak out
You made the right decision in my opinion
I don't think I'm going to be hungry for lunch today after all.
Oh yeah? And why not?
I got up early and made a giant breakfast for my family.
I'm so jealous! What did you make?
I went all out with eggs, bacon, waffles, fruit, sausage, and cinnamon rolls.
Oh, that sounds delicious!
The family said this morning that they had a really good  meal.
What meal?
I made them breakfast.
Oh that's nice.
I needed to get that piano out of my house.
How did you do it?
Well, it wouldn't fit through the front door!
Did you guys set up some kind of system?
With the movers, I helped set up a pulley to lift the piano upstairs!
What a pain that must have been!
It looks like the movers yesterday were having a hard time getting that piano through the door
Did you help them out?
I made a pully for them so it made it easier for them to move
I think that was a great idea and sounds nice everyone worked together to solve the issue.
The movers couldn't get the piano through the front door.
I have some pulleys you can use if you need them.
Yeah, that's what I did, I used a pulley to lift it up to the next floor.
That's what I also did. I could not get mine through the front door either, and had to use the same thing.
I sweetened the pot for the contest when I announced that the winner will get $500.
I could see where that would be pretty good incentive.
Exactly. Who wouldn't want an extra $500?
I can't think of too many people who couldn't use $500!
Seriously. So I'm hoping that people work really hard to win it.
I would imagine most people will. If they want the money, they'll have to do the work!
Hey everyone. Put your name in the raffle.
What will the winner get?
The winner is going to get a huge pay-out.
How much?
Everyone who joins the raffle has a chance to win $500. The lucky winner will get a $500 debit card.
Wow, I want to join. Hey everyone. Put your name in the pot. Somebody is going to be the lucky winner.
I added some money for the 1st place winner.
How much money did you add?
I sweetened the pot by saying I would give the 1st place winner $500.
Wow! I bet they're all trying their best now.
I saw Cameron's sister's picture in the yearbook, did you see it?
Yeah, she's really pretty!
Yes, she is.  I told her so.
Haha, how did that go?
Well, we have a date this weekend!
You'll have to tell me all about it next week.
I saw a picture of Cameron's sister in the yearbook.
How did she look?
She was pretty and I told Cameron's sister that.
Bold move, my friend. How did she take that?
We're going to dinner tonight.
Sydney took me out for lunch last weekend.
Did you go to the new Italian pizza place that just opened? I'm sure you love that kind of restaurants.
I loved it indeed. Have you been to that restaurant before?
I have but not sure I had the best food on the menu.
I can recommend some tasty menu options, Sydney gave me some great suggestions when we were there.
That would be great, I've only tried the Cesar salad. 
Do you know that Sydney took me for lunch?
I bet he took you to his favorite restaurant.
Yes, and he suggested the best items on the menu.
And he said that’s because he wants you to eat only the best?
Yes! Sydney is so sweet.
You were really lucky to meet, such a nice couple.
Sydney took me for lunch last weekend and gave me some great food suggestions.
At the Spanish place? There are a lot of good lunch choices there. I think some of the best are the daily specials.
Yeah , I had one of the specials, Sydney suggested to try.
Yeah, specials there are so good.
I'm getting back together with Bailey...
Jan, no!  Don't you remember when he broke your heart the first time?  It took me two years to make you smile again!
But he's changed.  He swears that he won't sleep with either one of my sisters ever again, and he broke it off with my mom just so he could be with me again!
Any boy can say he's changed, but that doesn't make it true!  Bailey is bad for you and you need to think about this some more.
But I'm in love with him.  He's my soulmate and I want to spend the rest of my life with him!
How can you feel this way after he slept with both of your sisters and your mom?  And your brother????
I know everybody’s angry that I’m giving him another chance.
Bailey did you wrong a couple of years ago.
Are people allowed to change?
Yes they are, but it still doesn’t mean they need to get another chance.
I’m a forgiving person and I have forgot that he broke my heart on that raining night
I’m your friend and I’m gonna be here for you no matter what.
I'm so glad I gave Bailey another chance.
I didn't know you guys had dated in the past.
Yes, he broke my heart two years ago on a rainy night.
Wow, and you took him back?
Yes, after much begging, pleading and romancing I agreed to take him back and we're getting married soon.
Wow, what a love story!
I cant believe Riley is acting like that.
You didn't have to make her feel bad about the outfit telling her everyone hated it.
Seeing her sad face made me feel bad.
Seems you have learnt, don't do that again.
Riley had this cool new dress she wanted to wear out.
You said she wanted to, why didn't she?
Well, I actually told her she looked terrible and people would hate it and say it was cheap and she decided to change it.
Why did you tell her that if you thought the dress was cool?
Because everyone was going to be paying attention to her. She looked crushed after I said it and I instantly felt bad but it was too late.
Wow that's pretty low. You could have been honest.
The other day I lied and told Riley her outfit was horrible and everyone hated it
Why would you do that?
Because I was jealous and thought other people would notice Riley.
Oh, that's childish.
I know, and I felt so bad when Riley changed her espression and looked crushed.
Well that happened already, be more careful in the future.
I was getting jealous when Riley was getting ready and came in with that outfit.
I can tell, I saw your face then.
That's why I made that bad comment and told her everyone hated that dress.
I know man.
I instantly regretted it when I saw Riley's expression, she looked so sad.
It's all good, she understood.
I taught Aubrey how to swing a golf club.
Oh, how do you do that?
Same as I told Aubrey. First, you place your hand down at your side and then you will need to know the different parts of the golf club.
Ok, so that's how you start.
I love this golf club , the holes are not complicated and beginners can come and practice.
Well I have never played here, this club's fields take time and patience.
So why did you decide to play golf again here?
Well, I am coaching Aubrey, I already taught her how to swing.
How did you swing?
Well the first thing to do is to place your hands on the side as I also did with Aubrey.
Aubrey and I went to the golf course yesterday.
I didn't know that Aubrey knew how to play golf?
She doesn't, I had to coach her on how to swing a golf club.
Did she learn fast?
Yes, I told her to place her hands at her sides and she followed my instructions.
You must be a really good teacher.
If you placed her hands on their side it’s gonna be easier for you to teach them how to swing at golf.
I was wondering why you were doing that.
It’s a technique that I learned years ago, I also taught Aubrey this a few days ago.
I’m gonna start using it from now on because it seems to work.
It works for me, and I’m not that bad at the game.
You’re better than not bad, you’re great.
I placed Aubrey's hands at her side when I was teaching her how to swing a golf club.
She's being taught the correct way.
Learning the correct form to begin with is so important.
That's right.  Bad habits are hard to break.
Aubrey is kind of good already.  Her swing is quite good.
She probably takes after you.
I was so hungry  when I saw the hot dog stand there.
What where you craving?
I wanted to eat a hot dog.
But you're eating a hamburger.
Yeah, I had to take a hamburger instead, they didn’t have hot dogs anymore.
That's not bad, I like hamburgers.
I'm so glad that I could work on this project with a classmate so we can get it done
I agree, I think we can do a really good job working with another person.
I think we'll try to focus on the main parts first and then we can fill in the details.
Sounds like a great idea to me.
We had to do a group project today in class.
Who did you work with?
I worked with a guy named John.
Was it a good partnership?
Actually it was a great one as we both worked hard and what I knew he didn’t know and what he knew I didn’t know.
Sounds like you found a good partner for the project.
I have to go to the library today for a project.
Why are you going there, you have a good workspace at home?
I know, but I have to work with a few classmates for this project.
Is it a group project?
Yeah, it's a group project and we need to have a quiet neutral space to have.
Well, good luck on your grade, I know you'll work hard.
It was so stressful but I think I'm done with my group project.
Did you get your scores yet?
Already? No, we just finished.
Ok! never mind.
It was a group project so I worked side by side with a class mate
Okay!
Hey, what’s up?
Hey! I have tickets to a Lady Gaga concert. Do you wanna go?
Of course! When is it for?
Tonight at 8pm at the Palladium.
Tonight?!? I have a date with Cameron tonight. Well, it’s not everyday you get to see Lady Gaga. I’m sure he’ll understand.
That’s my girl! It’s gonna be so much fun!
I just wrote Jesse a later.
What did you do that for?
I got into an argument with herm the other day and felt bad.
Why don't you just talk to him in person?
It's sometimes hard for me to express how I feel in person. I thought a letter would do a better job.
That does make sense since you can just say what you want without interruptions.
I really want to patch things up with Jesse. I wrote her a letter today since she isn't answering any of my calls.
I'm sorry to hear she's ignoring you. A letter sounds like a good idea.
Yeah, I'm hoping she'll read it. I thought the effort of writing a letter would show her that I really care.
That makes sense. I hope she responds to you. It's sad seeing you two not getting along.
Yeah, it's been rough. I really miss her. Thanks for being here for me right now.
You're welcome. You can always talk to me.
I had an argument with Jesse, my bestfriend
Did you clear both your minds?
No! I just wrote her a letter to explain things
I hope she'll understand you now.
Man the snow is so magical to me.
Not just to you, there is something special about it to me too.
Yeah, I felt so good just playing around in it dancing, making snowballs and snow angels.
That sounds like a happy time.
It really was.
It snowed so much today!
Did you play outside?
I sure did, I made a bunch of snow angles and threw snow balls.
That sounds like fun.
It really was!
I had a great time out in the snow today.
What did you do?
I played and made snow angels and snowballs.
That sounds like fun.
Yeah, but my hands are numb.
You might have frost bite.
I feel like a little kid in this snow, I can't believe it snowed so much last night!
This is awesome! I love the snow angel you made!
gThese snow balls are packing perfectly! We should have a snow ball fight
Right, this is the best kind of snow, it's so fun to play in
It's been forever! I'm making another angel
Let's make a snowman!
What's the point of summer vacation if they give you reading assignments?
Yea, I've never understood that.
I had 3 books to read. So far, I read two.
That's great. Only one to go.
I know. Still so much to get through. The last book is thicker than the first two put together.
Oh no! That's a lot of reading.
I can't believe you guys managed to organize this entire thing.
We did it because we care about you. And we're worried.
I know. I could tell people were starting to notice that I'm having -- a problem.
Don't be embarrassed. It's out of your control, but it can be fixed. This intervention was the first step.
Thank you so much for caring. And for doing something when I was unable to.
That's what friends do. All we want is for you to get better and be well.
Today I felt so betrayed
Why did you feel this way? We were trying to help you
I did not expect Bailey to bring me to the house and all of you be waiting to talk to me
We felt an intervention was needed to help you get past this problem
I know, but It was sort of a shock to me
Sorry, but we really felt it would be helpful to you
I turned on the oven so I could make a pizza for lunch today.
Okay, what happened?
I ended up forgetting all about it and it stayed on for too long.
When did you remember?
Like 3 hours later.
Yeah that's too long. Try not to do that again.
Hey are you hungry?
Yeah I'm starving.
I have a frozen pizza we could have.
That sounds great.
Alright I'll go turn the oven on.
Sounds good.
I bought a pizza from the grocery store.
What are the toppings?
The pizza has pepperoni and sausage as toppings.
How did you cook it?
I just needed to warm the pizza in the oven for 15 minutes. I turned the oven on and warmed the pizza. Now, it's ready to eat.
It looks yummy.
I gave Robin an elaborate hair style for her wedding.
That's great. How did she like it?
She liked it a lot. She has a lot of hair, so I had to push it quite a bit to style it.
I can't wait to see the photos.
Unfortunately her husband left her at the altar.
At least she looked great though.
I have been feeling rebellious tonight
What do you mean, why?
My commander made some pretty harmful and unjust demands that I refuse to follow
So you are ignoring them?
Yeah pretty much, I don't care what happens at this point
Maybe you shouldn think about the real consequences for your future
I refuse to take orders for the things that are so wrong. I have been going against my commander every chance I get.
I didn't know it was that bad. Are you being told to do illegal things?
Yeah, some of the stuff is pretty serious. I need to report him.
If that's what you think is right. You can only fight so long from your position.
There was a bad winter storm outside.
I can't go out too.
I will just spent my hours online.
I will invite you to my chat rooms.
Let's play some online games.
Okay, I will message my team.
I have literally been online all day today.
Why haven't you been outside?
Have you seen it outside? It's been snowing all day.
I know, but I thought you would want to play in the snow.
I am not a child.
Okay then, it's just that it's not healthy to be online all day long.
That snow storm makes me feel like I'm in the middle of Alaska.
Tell me about it, I can barely look out the window!
Yeah I had to turn up the heat by 10 degrees!
Oh, and don't even get me started with the cleaning we'll have to do!
I don't even wanna think about it! I just play some online games and watch some youtube videos!
Sounds great !
I'm just spending some time online.
Do you have nothing better to do?
I do. But there is a bad winter storm outside.
It's sunny where I live.
That's why I'm talking to you online. I'd like to be reminded what it's like.
I can just show you some videos of it.
I was shoplifting at the local pharmacy.  I told my friends that I got arrested and put in jail for a couple of weeks.
Only a couple of week?
I think they ran out of space and let some people out.
Isn't this your second time in there in the past six months?
Yes, I think I need help
What can I do to help you?
I thought everyone deserved an explanation about my arrest.
I agree. They were all wondering what happened exactly.
Yeah, so I had a bunch of them over last night and went through the whole story.
That's great. It must've felt good to get that all out in the open.
It did. So now they know it was all a big misunderstanding and that I didn't actually do anything.
Good. Hopefully we can all just move on and put this behind us.
I can't believe that Riley apologized.
I know it was awesome to see it happen.
And on top of that all the bullying has stopped altogether.
I'm wondering what changed to cause him to stop
I don't know but I don't mind.
Stop making fun of me.
I apologize for acting that way.
I forgive you for real.
Let's go workout.
Sounds good.
Meet you at eleven.
Your'e so mean for making fun of me everyday
All you have to do is stop wearing the cat shirt and I will leave you alone
It's my favorite shirt that my brother gave to me
I guess I am sorry for making fun of you and never do it again
That would be nice of you
Hey, would you like to go shopping Elaine?
Sure, Quinn. You're great company, It's always fun going shopping with you.
What time would you like to leave?
Oh sometime this evening. John always works in the evening.
Where shall we start the food court, or the apparel stores?
How about Old Navy? I heard they have a sale on.
I went shopping with Sydney’s wife the other day.
Why did she go with you?
I am bad at picking out clothes for work and she is a fashion coordinator.
So her husband set you guys up I guess?
Yeah he said I needed major help in the suit department.
Next time I will tag along because I need some business attire as well.
My husband messed up on my daughter's birthday this year.
What, did he not get her enough gifts?
Yep. I had to go to the store myself and buy a bunch of toys for her. I was quite mad at him, but I used his credit card.
Haha. In that case, no harm no foul.
Exactly. It's her 5th birthdayl!
Well you're taking good care of her, that's for sure!
I just got back from the store.
Oh, what did you end up getting them?
I got them a few dolls, some blocks, and some really fun arts and crafts projects.
Wow, sounds like they are going to have a great birthday!
I really hope they like the gifts. I wanted to spoil them.
It sounds like you did.
I got so many toys for my daughter's fifth birthday. I bought out the store.
You are totally spoiling her. Did she like them?
She was more interested in eating the cake. It was a chocolate Elsa cake with vanilla frosting. .
She has such a sweet tooth.
ok guys, time for bed.
it's not even late yet.
I know, but we have to get up early tomorrow to go hiking.
ok, let me brush my teeth before you turn off the lights.
hurry up, we need to get a good night sleep.
ok, I'm done, you can turn the lights off now.
I'm getting tired
Why? It's so much fun!?
I think I had my fill, I'm going to turn off the light
I think I'm getting tired too
Let's call it a night, it's time to go to bed
Good night
A few weeks ago I had a bunch of friends over for a sleepover.
I love having sleepovers!
Yeah me too, we stayed up until midnight before I finally turned off the lights.
Was anyone still awake?
No. Everyone had fallen asleep by the time I finally got up to turn the lights off
Those are the best nights!
You know who the perfect group is to sell your goods too?
Who, I really don't know who would want to buy this
I'm telling you, go down to one of those hipster craft fairs they will eat this up
You think?
I know it, I've been to a few and seen stuff like this, yours blows it out of the water
I'll definitely give that a try
Aubrey needed help to sell her inventory
Did you help her?
Yes! She needed her merchandise to sell to a typical client who would enjoy her soaps
Did you set it up in your store?
Next to the bath items
Awesome thinking
I am teaching my daughter how to ride a bike.
That is good parenting.
I am training as well in Sakaja.
All the way in Sakaja?
Yeah it is great here since I got time I thought I show my daughter to ride a bike.
That's awesome!
Hey do you want to come with me to Sakaja?
Yes. Sure why are you going all the way out there?
To show my daughter how to ride a bike.
Oh. That's awesome you can get some little bells for her bicycle.
I remember learning to ride at Sakaja as a child. It seems like just yesterday.
She'll remember this day forever.
I bought a bike for my daughter.
Oh that is lovely! Can she ride it well?
No, I just taught her how to ride at my prior training time.
At Sakaja, right?
Yes, she is a fast learner.
That is cool!
I showed my daughter how to ride a bike.
That's great and to do it prior to your trip.
Yea, now we can ride when I get back.
It helped get my mind off of it.
She's going to value that for life.
A lifetime of memories.
I've always like to paint since I was a child
Oh I see why you're really good in art works
Yeah so I became a professional artist
You have really done well for yourself man
I have always loved drawing from childhood.
Is it a hobby to you or do you intend to make a career out of it?
I attended art school. I am now a professional artist.
Good for you! Do you take commissions?
I do! Do you want something?
I would like a framed painting of my dog.
Thanks guys for coming
Yes thanks, Taylor for being our massage therapist.  This arthritis is killing me in my hand.
I enjoy my job.  I am looking forward to massaging your hands.
And you are very good at your job Taylor.
Does that feel alright?
Yes, my hands feel wonderful.
I can give you a hand massage.
Yea, I have arthiritis pain.
How long have you had it?
I've had it seven years.
Wow that's a long time.
Yes it's been tough.
Does this make your hand feel better?
It does. Where did you learn how to massage?
I took a massage class last year. Is your arthritis flaring up?
Yeah, the humidity has made it feel tight.
Is there anything else that helps your hand?
Pain meds but thanks for the massage Taylor.
Man that party last weekend was awesome.
Dude I did so much cocaine that night.
My parents totally flipped when they saw the mess that was left.
How did they like all the strippers passed out on their bed?
They grounded me for a week.
That was worth it.
I can't have company for the next month. My parents found out about the party.
We cleaned up so well. How did they find out?
One of our neighbors mentioned all the cars in the driveway all weekend.
Nosy people drive me crazy. Did you get punished?
Yeah. I am punished and can't have company for a month.
I'm sorry about that. You had a good party and I'm sorry your neighbors ran their mouth.
My parents grounded me for a week.
What did you do to get on their nerves?
I had small party when they were gone.
Was anything damaged by your friends.
No, but my parents lectured me about disclosure and trust.
How did they know you held a party?
I love playing this game.
What are you doing?
Well, I'm putting your hands up and tickling you.
Well, I know that's silly.
Well, yea it's a fun game for me. I enjoy it!
It sounds fun!
Its so fun to have tickle fights
I know right especially when you put my hands up as well
Yeah I truly love to do that with a passion
Tickle me some more Casey
Okay I will you silly goose
Haha, please don't stop
Alex really helped me out with that essay.
Did you pay him for it?
Yeah I had to pay him but I am glad I did.
You should do your own work Lee.
I know, but I was really busy.
I am only telling you this because I am your friend.
It was a little uncomfortable sleeping in the same bed with Lee.
Why did you guys have to share a bed?
The motel didn't have any other rooms with two beds left. So we had to share a small bed.
Why didn't one of you just sleep on the floor?
The motel was kind of dirty with roaches on the ground.
I wouldn't have been able to sleep if I was there.
I am exhausted today!
Didn't you sleep at Austin's house last night?
Yes, but I didn't know his bed was so small.
Next time you need to have Austin come to your house then.
I know, he was so close to me that I couldn't stretch out like I usually do.
Don't say anything to Austin though because it would hurt his feelings.
I had a terrible sleep last night.
Why, were you not able to sleep.
No, my buddy Austin came over and we slept together in my bed.
But your bed is really small.
Yeah and that's why I couldn't sleep well last night.
You look really tired.
Last night was weird.
What happened?
I had to crash at Austin's apartment. His bed was super small and we slept next to each other. It was uncomfortable.
Why didn't you sleep on the couch or something?
Once I made the mistake of saying I wouldn't mind sleeping in the bed I was afraid to take it back. I thought it might hurt his feelings
I see. Well, try not to have to crash at Austin's again.
I'm headed out. The weather is very nice today
Can I join you?
You are welcome. I going to fly my kite so you should bring yours too.
I don't have a kite.
Don't worry about it. We will share mine or buy one at the park.
Thank you. I will be there shortly.
I went to fly a kit ,just really wanted to be outside on such a pretty day.
I know that feeling especially when wanting to run or enjoy nature.
It was great because I had some of my family there to fly kites
That is cool, normally I have to beg my family to do anything outside
You know me and my family we love the great outdoors
That is true, you always like to be out and about with other people especially when you are exercising
Happy Birthday, Sasha!
Thanks, Austin. It's nice you came over on my birthday.
I actually came over to give you a birthday gift, but I seem to have left it at home.
Well, what is it? Your company is enough for me.
It was money. I'll run and get it later. I thought I had stuck it in my wallet.
Don't worry about it, Austin. I like seeing you. Stay for dinner, please.
I’m going to have to head to the bank before I see Sasha again.
Are you trying to give her some money for her birthday?
I was but I didn’t have any cash on me.
I think she has a cash app so you can use that.
I’ll have to download it first.
It takes no time at all and then you’ll not need to go to the bank.
The doctor said I have high blood pressure and need to lose about 50 pounds.
That sounds rough. Is there anything I can do?
I mostly have to do this on my own, but maybe you can tell me if I've been eating too much.
I couldn't lose some weight myself. Maybe we can try it together.
That sounds great! I think that will help a lot.
Let's get some salad!
I really need to do something about my weight.
Well, maybe it’s time to contact a nutritionist.
I weighed myself today in the doctor’s office and he gave me a warning.
What did the doctor say?
That I am at high risk of developing high blood pressure and heart disease.
You should take this warning very seriously.
I had a doctor's appointment today.
How did it go?
Everything went well. However, my weight was a little higher than my expectations.
What did the doctor recommend?
He told me to exercise more often and cut back on eating. He warned me that gaining more weight can have a negative impact on my health.
Good advice. Try to stick to your diet.
Ok, that doesn't work. I can barely lift my leg high enough to step on the scales!
Wow, Bailey.  Since last month you've gained 82 pounds.  What have you been eating?
Not much at all.  Just ice cream, ricotta cheese, pork skins, beef, eggs, and a couple of gallons of chocolate milk every day.
That's not good for you!  You have to try eating healthier and you have to start getting exercise instead of laying in bed 23 hours a day watching Tiger King.
I do exercise!  I walked like ten times today!
You walked six times to the refrigerator and four times to the freezer.  That's not what I mean.
I accepted a solo contract the other day.
Did the rest of the band get contracts?
No, and I doubted we would when I joined the band.
Did you think less of their skills even then?
No, I thought I wasn't as good, and that there're just too many fish in the sea.
The record company seems to disagree.
I was offered a solo contract.
Have you told the band? Did you take it?
I don't know how to tell them.
Just sit down and tell them the truth. It was a chance you could not turn down!
I joined a band, but I didn't stay there long.
Why didn't you stay?
Because I was so good, I was offered a solo contract.
Where was the solo contract?
It was opening for another group of musicians.
Nice.  Were you on the road a lot then?
Ouch, that hurts!
I told you not to run--no wonder you slipped and fell.
Is my knee bleeding?
Just a little--it'll be fine.
I feel so stupid.
It's o.k; I'll take care of you.
Ow my knee hurts!
How did you get a cut on your knee?
I was running after the puppy and I fell.
You were told not to run.
I know but I just wanted to see the puppy.
Well next time you will listen and not run.
I can't believe we got to see them in real life!
I know it was so cool!
And I even got their autograph
I bet that is worth so much money
It might be but I'll never sell it, it means too much to me
I don't blame you
So you will be jealous but I got to see the band backstage and they autographed my t-shirt!
No way, I knew that I should have got a ticket to go with you.
I told you, I didn't think we would get to do that but we were right in front so they had us come backstage.
Was it just random?
Yeah they singled me out and a few other people in the front row and whoever was with them as well.
That is insane, I can't believe I missed out on that.
I have been criticized for weeks.
Because of how you handle it.
I already put the management on their place.
I was shocked when I heard the news.
I just did my part.
You earn my praise.
I told my boss to shove it today.
You did not!
Yes, I certainly did. He has done nothing but yell at me and criticize my work for the past few months. I just couldn't take it anymore.
So what happened? Are you fired?
No. I went into his office because I had enough and just blew up. I said he can't talk to me like that and I'm not going to take it. He sat for a moment and then apologized.
Wow, I didn't expect that. Maybe he's had stuff going on in his life that has impacted how he acted with people.
There is only so much one man can take before losing it.
Ok, tell me what happened.
Alright so they were chewing me up for weeks and I finally had enough and put them in their place.
I bet that felt good didn't it?
Best feeling ever.
That should teach Austin for stealing my girlfriend!
What did you do, Taylor? I'm afraid to ask.
I stole his credit card and purchased a bunch of stuff, signing his name to them. He's gonna pay for doing me wrong.
Are you insane?? You could go to jail for that!
Not if you keep your mouth shut. I even bought you something, a new diamond ring.
What? My God, you're crazy?
Dude, what are you doing, that's nasty and rude. You're acting rowdy.
Sorry, I'm just trying to have some fun, messing around. You should let loose.
No, I'm house sitting here. You need to chill out.
OK, sorry, I just wanted to have fun.
Did you just fart?
Yeah. It smells better than you do.
You reek, Sydney! And you knocked over my ficus plant, too!
That plant's so hideous it deserves to die.
You're such a jerk! I have no idea why I'm even friends with you.
Because no one else will hang out with you.
Why are you acting like such a jerk today?!
What do you mean?
Well I don't appreciate you knocking over the plant and I certainly am not enjoying the odor from your farts!
Haha just trying to be funny
It isn't funny! It is disrespectful and childish, I do not appreciate it!
Okay, I'm sorry, I didn't realize it would make you feel that way.
I totally read the riot act this weekend to Austin.
Austin can be such a jerk.  What did he do this time?
He farted on me!
That is so gross, oh my god.
As if that wasn't enough, he knocked the hall plant over and broke the container.
Wow, what a jerk! I would be so mad at him too.
I spoiled my gift that my aunt wanted to surprise me with
oh how did you do that
I saw her at the store
I am guessing you saw her buying your gift
I did and she was not happy about it
I wouldn't either, spoiling the surprise
It stinks so bad in here.
What is that smell?
I had some of my pets in here.
Did they have accidents on the floor?
Yeah.
Oh, maybe they shouldn't be in here again until they're potty trained.
Why can't pets be instantly potty trained?
That is a weird question, but I don't know, people aren't instantly potty trained.
I guess that is true, but people don't generally pee all over the floor of my house.
Well I would hope not, is that what happened with the pets?
Yep, I have been cleaning all day because of what they did.
Well next time don't allow them in your home.
My wife is really mad at me.
What did you do now? I know she was mad that you brought home two dogs from the shelter.
She calmed down as long as the dogs stayed out during the day. I ended up allowing the dogs into the house during the day, then I left.
What did they do? Tear up the furniture?
No, they went to the bathroom all over the floor. My wife got home from work and had to clean up the entire mess.
Wow! I'd be pissed too.
I feel bad, everyone in the classroom is sick now thanks to me.
It's ok we all get to miss school now so you did us a favor.
I feel a lot better now, hopefully they won't hold this against me.
They won't. They'll understand.
Next time I will listen to my doctor.
You should, because even though we like missing school from time to time we don't enjoy being sick.
I really struggled with math in school.
Math is a really hard subject, what grades did you get?
I worked really hard and the most I ever got was a B.
Math can be a real nightmare for many.
You tell me, it was a nightmare for me.
I on the other hand love math.
I've always sucked at math. This college math is hard.
My worst subject too. I'm struggling but thanks to you I got a B on the exam.
That was rough and hard. Thanks to my tutor.
And then you taught me.
Just keep doing the work. If we have issues, I'll ask her if I don't know it.
Thanks for helping me.
I don't feel very comfortable going on this rollercoaster
I can hold your hand if you want me to when we're on the ride
I appreciate you for thinking of me but I think I=I will skip this one out
We can always come back later if you want to
That sounds like a great idea
This theme park has been so fun!
Yeah, and we haven't even gotten to the roller coaster yet!
I don't want to ride that, it terrifies me.
Me too, but come on, it's the main ride here.
I guess, if you insist.
You'll thank me later.
I am paying rent every month.
Good for you.
I have to work a lot, but it's worth it.
Your apartment is pretty nice.
Yeah, I don't have much money left at the end of the month.
At least you have a roof over your head.
I just got back from mailing my rent check.
It's not even the first yet.
I know. I like to mail it at the end of the month. It's one less thing to worry about after working hard all month.
That's a good idea. I'm always stressed out on the first trying to remember which bills I need to pay and all that.
Yeah, it's good to have rent out of the way.
I think I'll start doing that too!
I just payed the landlord.
I bet all that hard work payed off in that moment.
Yes, I am so glad I was able to change apartments.
Your apartment is really nice, but its expensive.
Yeah, it is, but it's also worth working hard for.
I agree, I wish I had an apartment like yours.
It seems like all my money in rent. I hate that
I know how you feel!
Rent here is so high, and the house is trash. It just seems like a waste of money
Well I hope one day you can find yourself a better place
Me too, I'm always looking
I'll keep an eye out for a place for you too
I had to put in twenty hours of overtime this week to make rent
I thought you looked exhausted
I have just been so tired lately that I almost fell asleep while driving to work
Sounds like you need to find a cheaper place to live
How about we go for a walk guys?
Where are we going dad?
Let's go to the park in the middle of town.
That would be awesome, are we going now?
Sure thing!
I love this park.
It's so big with a lot of things to do for the kids.
I like that it's smack dab in the middle of town.
Yes, very close only a 5 minute walk.
The walking trails are wonderful with all the birds.
It's nice exercise for us and the kids.
I took the kids out today.
What did you do?
Went to the park.
The one in the neighborhood or the big one downtown?
The one downtown--I thought they could use the walk.
Yes, lots of room to exercise there.
I am so happy it's over.
What is over?
I got my test results back and I passed all of them.
That's great news.  Did you think you wouldn't pass?
Well, I wasn't doing so well in my classes but I studied so hard the past two weeks.
Hard work pays off.
I am soi happy I passed the test
Yeah you worked so hard for it
It had been my goal for so long
I know I saw you work so hard
I am happy
Me too
I was late paying my credit card bill this week but I paid it.
How many days were you late?
I was three days late but there is only a fee after a week so it isn't a big deal.
Oh that's good, fees for late payments are usually really high.
Yeah, my heart skipped a beat when I realized I didn't pay it on time.
Paying bills is really the worst sometimes.
I can't believe I had to pay a fee because I was late in paying my credit card.
Was it a lot?
It wasn't too bad, but it's still a nuisance.
Why were you late paying your credit card bill?
Because of the last late fee I had to pay for the previous time.
You really shouldn't have a credit card.
So guess what, I decided to name the baby James.
Aw that is cute! Is it after his grandpa?
Yes, that was his grandpa's middle name.
I really like it, it goes well with your last name I think.
I know, we have so many J names in our family already but I have always liked the name James.
I am so excited for you and I cannot wait to meet James!
Oh! I cannot stop staring at him. he is so cute.
I wish I had a baby too.
I just had a him, I found a name.
What is his name?
I named him James.
I finally gave my baby a name.
What do we call that precious boy of yours?
James will be his name
That's a very strong name and one that he will carry well.
Thank you, I’m sure you’ll do it justice.
What if it was a girl?
We picked out the name for the  baby.
What did you guys come up?
We decided to name him James after my grandfather.
I bet your grandfather liked that, naming your baby after him.
He is one of the most important people in my life.
What an honor.
I've got a lot of work to do for this business.
What kind of work do you have to do?
I filled out order forms and answered questions.
That's not too bad.
It was easy but it was a lot.
Hi, sorry I had to skip lunch with you today. We had an important business meeting and had to delay lunch.
That's o.k., I know something important must have come up. How did it go?
! The sales manager had several order forms that I had to fill out. Then the sales reps asked me lots of questions.
Aren't sales fun! I actually enjoy the rush when I make a sale. Cha-ching!
I like sales so much, too, but I missed my quota today because of the meeting running so long.
I'm sure your boss understands. Maybe you could ask her to set a time limit for the next meeting.
So I was filling out the emergency loan forms for the shutdown.
Are we entitled to the money?
Well, if your business is losing money you're entitled to the loan.
Then everybody will say they are losing money.
Everybody is losing money.
That's a factor too.
I had to work two hour of unpaid over time because of Bill
I know Bill is the worst he just won't do his job
It sucks that he's the regional supervisors nephew
What can you do?
We could get him fired
That's a great plan
I think the best revenge is to live well.
You have personal experience in this?
I was bullied in high school, but graduated top of my class. I'm doing so well now that I think back and don't even feel angry.
But surely high school could have been a lot smoother?
Of course. I'm not going to say hardships made me a better person.
How does it not make you angry, then?
Hey, do you want to go to a party with me?
That depends, what kind of party?
Just a house party.
Will it be chill?
Yeah, everyone is really friendly. You are going to have fun. Pick you up at 8?
Okay, see you then.
I invited Sasha to the party next week.
That sounds like fun.
Yeah, I told him we would have a good time there.
I'm sure you will!
I'm nervous, but I'm sure we'll have a good time.
Let me know how it goes!
Hey we should go to this party together.
I don't know I'm am not a big party person
But we will have so much fun together.
Maybe, it might be fun. okay I'll go.
Ok so you're coming tonight right?
I don't know, I don't really know anyone
You know me! Come on 
I'm not sure
Well have a great time, I promise
Fine
That party was amazing
What happened
Crazy stuff me an Sasha hooked up
Whoa that is crazy!
I have a paper due tomorrow and I need to study but I just spent the last three hours playing video games.
Why were you playing video games when you knew you had work to do?
I just felt so overwhelmed I didn't know where to start.
Well, you just made yourself more stressed by not just getting anything done.
I know.  I'm not sure what to do.
I suggest you get some coffee and get to work.
I should be studying, but video games are so addictive!
Come on you have a paper tomorrow, are you sure you won't study?
Maybe later after my video games.
You won't pass tomorrow and it will be your own fault.
I know but  I don't care
Let's see what you say tomorrow when you have to perform. lol
I need to study hard today.
Why, what’s up?
I have a paper that is due tomorrow but I don’t feel like doing it.
You better start right now.
I can’t stop playing video games.
You will be in trouble then.
Hey Kendall, can you give me a hand with something?
I'll do my best, what's up?
I'm applying for a new job, and they need a bunch of references. Would you be willing to act as one for me?
Probably. I know you generally do good work. What kind of references do they need?
Friends and past employers.
Then sure, I'll vouch for you.
I met this woman Kendall at the networking event.
Do you think she can help you in your career?
She definitely can. She's the CEO of the local hospital.
Excellent. I'm sure you'll be able to use her as a reference to get a healthcare job.
I can't wait to see a potential employer's face when they see a CEO on my list of references!
They will be excited to meet you!
I already attracted several inquiries.
How did you do that?
I offer sold out tickets priced below their ticket sale.
Aren't you going to loose some profit?
Nope, It is still okay.
I should have bought one.
Hi, do you remember Cameron from high school?
I sure do, I've been worried about him for a long time.
I finally found him. Poor guy, he was dirty and hungry. It's so sad how personal tragedy can change a person.
Yes, I know he became depressed when his parents died in the accident. Then he disappeared!
I bought lunch for him, then took him to a shelter, they said they will help him get back on his feet.
Thank you for doing that! You're one of those angels walking around in this world.
I'm so glad I ran into you at the park.
I am too. I had no idea what I was going to do.
Just three weeks ago you had a great job and an apartment.
It just took a car accident and some medical bills to turn my life upside down.
I'm glad I could help out a little by getting you to the shelter.
I really appreciate it and I know that they are going to be able to help me.
I try to stay ahead of my finance.  I invest my money in the stock market and save some in a high yield savings account.
You are wise.
You never know what's the future holds.
That's so true.  I just lost my job and I have no savings.
That's not good.
I am hoping unemployment kicks in quickly so that I can pay my rent this month.
I'm glad I invested in a high yielding savings account.
I bet, you must be glad to have all that money now.
I am but I want to invest it.
Do you have any investments in mind?
Not really I will keep the money in the account for the moment.
Hopefully it will grow a lot more.
I keep bumping into walls.
You need glasses.
I need more than that.
What have you decided to do?
I have decided to get eye surgery.
That is a good decision.
I'm finally starting to feel better from my surgery.
That's good. How long has it been since you had the surgery?
A month ago, but my eyes have still been adjusting.
How is your vision doing at this point?
I mean it's crystal clear for the most part, but sometimes I get an occasional headache.
Well, I hope those finally go away too.
Alex kept pointing at his lips.
Why did she do that?
I thought there was something on them initially but I think she just wanted me to kiss her.
Did you kiss her?
I pressed her lips to mine and she was fine with it.
That's one way to send a signal.
This person named Alex moved into my neighborhood.
Did you talk to them?
Yeah, I will ask her out soon.
So you know that Alex is single?
Yes, she told me it was a significant step paying the mortgage by herself.
I wish you good luck, then.
I'm going to ask my new neighbor Alex to come to my party next week.
Do you even know her at all when she's a new neighbor?
Not really, since she just moved into the neighborhood last Tuesday.
Then why are you inviting her to your party?
I think she's cute and I'm interested in asking her out.
That's so cute you have a crush!
There is a new woman Alex at the apartment building at the end of my block.
You met her already?
I talked to her while she was moving her items in. She stopped and asked about my dog.
Is she nice?
Nice, and nice looking. Really attractive.
You gonna ask her out?
So my teacher gave me this cheat sheet in case we  need it
Does that show everything that is going on in the world right now?
It shows all the oil deposits and the coal mines on the globe right now that we know of
I guess that will come in handy for the test then
I found an old fable that seemed like it was written for today.
What did the fable talk about?
It explained a lot of the stuff that is going on in the world today.
That's crazy, and it was written a long time ago?
Yes, it's some timeless wisdom.
That's cool, I'd like to read the fable myself.
I saw this new experience dinner online today and went for it.
Really? What is it?
Well, you get to have this gourmet dinner with all kinds of exotic ingredients.
Wow, sounds interesting...and expensive.
It was a lot of money, but you only live once, right?
You are always doing stuff like that! Hope you enjoy it.
I was so mad at myself for failing that test. I should have done so much better.
That's what happens when you don't prepare as much as you should.
I know. It was my fault. But I am so happy I had the chance to retake it.
I'll bet you really buckled down and studied hard for that one.
Totally. That's all I did for an entire week basically. It really paid off.
That's great. Studying is the only thing that really works.
The first practice test I failed.
You should have studied.
I know, but I discussed it with my teacher.
What did your teacher tell you?
She would give me the night to study and I could retake the practice test and I passed.
lucky you.
I bombed the first test! I got a 65.
You should ask Mrs. Jones if you can retake it.
It was just a practice test, but I thought I would do better than that.
Ask what areas you struggled in and we can study it together.
I think I really did well on the practice test.
I thought you took the practice test before?
I did. But I failed the first time so I decided to retake it.
Did you study this time?
I did. Since I got it together I think I'll pass it this time.
I hope that you do.
People seem to really like my performances at local events.
You are a great pianist after all.
Thank you. Now I have my eyes on a bigger stage.
I hope to see you play at a bigger venue soon.
Do you know of any concert halls that would be willing to let me perform the piano there?
I'm sorry, I'm not in the music and entertainment industry so I don't know of any.
That's okay. I'm trying to expand my piano performance repertoire to bigger venues.
That's great, considering how popular your performances are in local events.
I know, everyone's always telling me that my performances are amazing so I want to take my playing to the next level.
You can start by calling some concert halls that you find online.
I don't know if I'm really ready for big venues like Jon is suggesting.
You are great. Why don't you feel ready?
I don't know. It's one thing playing for people I know. Playing for strangers is quite another thing altogether.
You are definitely ready. You need a confidence boost.
I guess it's all about my confidence level. I get nervous just playing in front of family.
Close your eyes and play. Act like no one is there.
I love being able to share my talent with others.
Chris said you gave him a new understanding of the piano.
It makes me happy to teach a student a new style and be able to tickle the ivories at the same time.
He was wondering if you could give him lessons every week?
I would love to! I can even teach him other instruments.
I love piano so much! I like all instruments, but there's nothing like tickling the ivories!
It is beautiful. Especially when it's played with passion, like you do.
I can't help it. I The music just calls to me. If I don't answer, I'll explode!
You're a true musician I guess.
I love the ivories the most, but really, I love all instruments.
Everyone has a favorite.
I can do anything on the piano.
It offers a full range of sounds.
That's right.  It's also the first instrument I learned how to play.
Your dad taught you, right?
I have a great passion for music instruments.
I saw you playing piano in church.
Yeah, that's my favorite instrument.
Hmm.
I'm the happiest when I tickle the ivories.
That's awsome
Do you see that wolf ?
Yes, if we don't do something about it people are going to be scared.
Stay here, don't move.
Wait, what are you planning to do?
I'm going to keep the wolf from the door.
Please be safe.
There's a wolf right outside my door.
Is it your friend or something?  Why is there a wolf outside your door?
Not exactly.  I have seen it outside in the yard a few times this year.
Oh so it pays you regular visits.
It has never been violent towards me but there are people in the house whom I am trying to keep safe.  Don't say anything to alarm them.
Maybe you should call the rangers or something.
My kids have been bothering me for days on end
Well I know your kids. What did they want this time?
They have been asking for toys but I just bought them some last week
So did you finally get them the toys
No, I refused and stayed strong
Good for you
I had to put my foot down once and for all.
Good for you. Those kids run you ragged.
And they don't appreciate anything I do.
Yeah, you have to make it clear to them that things are going to change.
Right. No more whining. That's all they do.
That's how they've been taught. That's what works for them.
Well, I won the war today on the political front. I was arguing with several people and I was the one who was right.
They didn't know who they were messing with. That's funny.
I told them some of the statistics on the economy and they actually laughed at me.
I take they don't realize how much you read about that kind of stuff.
No, they think I'm a stupid woman who should be at home in the kitchen.
Oh dear, are they able to stand right now? I know you let them have it.
Your friend Sydney came and gave me an estimate on the work that he would do here today?
Oh really? When are you guys going to start?
We will not be starting. When he gave me that estimate I kept a straight face but I wanted to laugh.
Was it really bad?
It was more than the last three guys I got an estimate from. He said it's because he doesn't cut corners, and I appreciate that. But I can't afford it.
So I guess you won't get work done then. Sorry about that.
I just bought a new 2020 Toyota Corolla!
Fantastic!  Who was your sales person?
Sydney Blumenthal.  Sales people can be good or bad. Sydney was a horrible, weasel.
What happened?
Sydney gave me an estimate on my trade-in by writing it on a piece of paper and sliding it across the desk to me.  I nearly gagged when I saw it, but I kept a straight face and replied, Double it and we have a deal.  After listening to Sydney wine for about 30 minutes, the sale person relented.  I have a new car!
Sounds like a horrible experience.  But I'm glad it worked out for you!
These birds make so much noise but they are really cute
I think those are owls and they are adorable
Did you know that they can see in the night and hunt mice?
That's incredible. maybe we can see them through the binoculars
I see one right over there in that tree
I've been practicing judo every day since I was a kid.   Then I broke my leg and had to stop until that heals.  It just feels odd not to be doing judo.
You will get back into it once you are healed.
I am glad it's not like I have to give up judo for the rest of my life.
It's good to have a ritual.  I wish there was something I did every day like that.
You swim every day.
Only during the summer when it's hot.
I can't wait to get my first tree!
Oh yeah you just got the new house.
Yeah, I have been there a while, but I can't wait to spend my first Christmas there.
Christmas is always the best.
It is my favorite holiday, my tree is going to be amazing.
I am sure it will be.
I'm really looking forward to this Christmas!
Why is that?
It's my first one at my new house, so I'm really excited
Oh that's awesome! That's always a big occasion
Yeah I cant wait to put up my tree this year
It wouldn't be Christmas without one!
I'm so excited for Christmas this year and cant wait to celebrate in my new house
I've seen the tree that you bought last night
It was pretty cheap for being 12 feet tall
I bet you can fit all your ornaments on there with no problem
I'm sure I can
There was an awesome tree that I've found and I think it would fit perfectly in my house
Oh really.  And it is perfect you found it because you can use it before Christmas
Yeah that is really true
I can't wait to see how it looks
Me neither.  It is going to be awesome looking
Yeah.  Merry Christmas!
I took Sally to hospital yesterday
Really! What's up with her?
She got injured while playing tennis and boy! She was in pain
Sorry to hear that. Was she attended to by a doctor?
Yes she was. I actually kept her comfortable until the doctor came in  to see us
That's so nice of you
The patient was in a lot of pain.  I had given Sarah her daily doses of painkillers, but they don't seem to be working.
Maybe she needs something stronger.
The doctor was coming in to see Sarah soon.  He can revise her medications then.
It must be hard to see the patients in pain.
It can be, especially when the medications aren't helping much.  They get no relief.
I don't know how you do it.
Okay, do you feel alright? The doctor will be in soon.
Yes, I'm ok. but is it possible to have something to drink?
Absolutely. Here is a cup of water.
Thank you. You're very kind.
Wow. Remy was so scared of flying, I had to jump in to allay his fears.
What, he wasn't gonna go on his trip?
No. He didn't want to fly. I had to convince him.
What did you tell him?
Well, I just explained how safe it was and that he was safer flying than driving.
That's true. It's definitely more dangerous in a car than a plane.
I absolutely love to fly.
I have never flown before so I'm uneasy.
It's so fun and airports are great.
Are you sure I'll be okay?
Absolutely positive! You'll love it!
I hope you're right!
Flying is one of the safest way of travel these days.
But what if one of the engines stops working, we lost a wing, or we crash.
According to statistics you are more likely to crash in a car crash then a plane going down.
Ok maybe but I still don't like flying it's scary.
Just hold my hand and close your eyes when you are scared.
I just got back from a trip with Remy
I thought Remy was afraid of flying
Remy was very scared to get on the plane, but I told him how safe it is to fly
It's true, flying is much safer than driving a car
Yup, and once Remy heard how safe it was his mind was put at ease
That's good, I hope you had a fun trip
So my teacher is really a pill.
What do you mean?
She wanted to flunk me for bad behavior.
That shouldn't have anything to do with your grades though.
I know. That's what I said. I passed the exam though.
That is good to hear. Maybe you should try working better with teachers though.
I ended up passing Jesse's exam today.
That is great! Didn't he want to flunk you though?
Yeah because he really doesn't like me that much and he says I talk to much.
You are really smart though, so you showed him then!
I hope he doesn't take it out on me and dock me points on my final semester grade anyway.
That would be a totally scummy move if he did that.
I know that I'm a handful for teachers but I get my work done and get good grades.
What makes you such a handful for teachers?
Because I question what they are teaching me. I don't accept half the stuff they call science.
So questioning is a no at your school?
No, but Jesse says I have behavioural problems because I question him.
Well I hope you question in a respectful manner, they are your teachers Bailey.
I had one of the hardest weeks of my school year.  Thanks to this tough teacher!
Who it is, have you told me about them before?
No, it was Jesse, my history teacher.
What did he do to you?
He was going to flunk me out of the class because I talked too much in class, but I passed his latest test.
Oh I see. good job on the test, that will keep you in good standing.
My final was so hard.
Did you pay attention during class?
I took it a little too easy.
That'll bite you in the end.
Yeah, I didn't know the answers.
Next time you should pay more attention.
I screwed up big time.
You are much better than that.
Yeah, I took it easy at the finals.
It cost you badly.
Seriously.
Better luck next time.
Next time I have to make sure that I do a better job
I think that most of us think we’re better than we are when it comes to studying.
I know who I am and I know most of my teammates
Once you formed a bond that’s when you go out and do what you have to do.
Thanks for the kind words
No problem it was my pleasure.
I should have studied more.
Did you fail?
I don't know yet, but I didn't know any of the questions on the test.
That's not good.
I know.
I just asked my son to go get the mail.
Is that why he just left kind of grumpy?
Yeah it was. But I just so the mailman go by.
I guess he's gonna be more careful next time he sees the mailman drive by.
I don't think he'll mind this time. I ordered him a gift to be delivered.
Well, at least he won't be grumpy when he returns.
He should be back any minute.
Where did you send your son?
I asked him to get the mail. I thought I saw the mail truck go by.
What a great helper!
I know, he loves to find little jobs like this.
He's a sweet boy.
Yesterday I sent my son to check the mail and along with the new mail he found an old letter buried at the bottom of the mail box.
Something interesting?
Well, it seems that we are being audit by the Federal Government.
Oh, do you think you are in some kind of trouble?
I don't know. We were supposed to present supporting documents before April 1st.
I have a good tax lawyer to recommend in case you need one.
I'm so late right now.
You missed the million dollar sales call.
I overslept from hangover.
Don't ever do that again.
I won't
You could get fired.
What did I miss at the beginning of class today?
Not much. He was just talking about the paper.
I will need to speak to the professor. My alarm was set on silent so I overslept this morning and was 30 minutes late.
I noticed you came in late. You may want to check with the professor to see if you were marked absent or not.
I hope not. I was there for two-thirds of the class.
You never know though. You should check.
I didn't hear my alarm clock this morning and overslept.
Were you late to work?
Oh,  yes.  I was really late.
Did your manager say anything?
The good news was they didn't realize I was late. I was able to sneak in and get to my desk before they noticed.
That was a streak of good luck for sure.
I feel like talking to my family tonight has helped me find peace finally.
So you think the issues will go away now?
They will never go away I just think we know how to deal with it better now.
It is always good to talk with family to work out problems.
Yeah, for so long we just swept everything under the rug.
When you know how other people feel you can react to them accordingly and not have big fights as well.
I think I finally understand why my dad left my mom with us when we were younger
did you finally end up talking to your dad after all these years?
we talked on facebook for about an hour and he explained everything to me
well I'm glad that you feel better about it and understand his reasons
It's been a rough couple of years but I finally feel ok.
Were you able to get closure from all of your family issues?
I was, I finally understand why they did everything.
I bet that took a lot of forgiveness and self exploring.
It did, it was a tough path to follow.
I can imagine. Dealing with family drama is always hard.
I'm feeling a lot better today after seeing my family.
Did you guys have fun?
The meeting wasn't really about having fun. We've had issues we had to deal with for a while.
I hope it wasn't anything serious.
Just something I've been struggling with for many years. But talking to them really gave me closure.
I'm happy for you.
I love drinking coca-cola and eating candy.
I love it too, but I hate the sugar crash.
Tell me about it. I went out for candy and a soda after work the other night and I totally crashed a few hours later.
It is always so fun at the time, but the crash makes me regret it every time!
Right? Until the next time and it is like I totally forgot about how bad I felt!
Exactly. We will never learn.
I'm starting a new job today at the day care!
Sound fun!  Do you have experience working with children.
Yes.  I took care of children at my last job.
Are you nervous about starting this new job?
No.  I'm confident that I can do well at this job.
Awesome!  Update me on how it's going from time to time.
These are the easiest children I've ever worked with.
What are you doing?
I'm at my new day care job.
Where have the children been more difficult?
I babysat for a rich family, the I did everything for the kids.
I can imagine how spoiled those children were.
I can't wait to start my new job.
You are so great with children.
They just make me happy and laugh.
It must be very challenging for you.
I find that they are honest and connect me to my youth.
Yeah they can say some amazing things.
I am sick of getting bullied, she always hurts me
How so?
She's a bigger girl and pushes me into the wall daily
Ouch, she is a horrible person
I need to tell the principal
You better, this is hard to deal with
I'm so proud of myself today. You should have seen me.
Oh, that sounds intriguing. What happened?
I finally got fed up with that older girl at school who always gives me a hard time.
Finally! She's been on your case for years, hasn't she?
Pretty much. I finally told her off and she was shocked. And it was in front of the whole lunchroom.
That's excellent! I'm glad it worked. And you're right, I wish I would have seen you.
I finally got my revenge on that Big Lisa the school bully.
Lisa is just so mean, she picks on all of us but especially you.
I know, and last week I had enough and devised a plan to get her to stop.
What did you do ? I didn't see her at school today.
I knew she liked to pick on me when I wore this pink dress so I made sure I had a teach inside the room when she started picking on me and the teach saw her hit me and now she is expelled.
I wont miss her, she was a mean kid.
Do you have any idea where we are?
I have no clue at all.
Why isn't the GPS working?
Yeah, that needs to be fixed.
Why don't I take my phone out and call for help?
Sure, call AAA.
Hello, Ted. I seem to have gotten lost. Can you help?
Well, what's around you?
I'm on Beacon Street, and I'm stopped at the BP station across from a yellow house.
I think I know where you are. Go about two stoplights and make a right. That should put you back on track.
Thanks, man. I really appreciate it.
No problem. Let me know if you need more help.
Hey man I was trying to go home from the party, but have no idea where I am anymore.
Don't you have GPS on your phone? Why don't you use that?
My phone is out of data, I can only text or call
Well where do you think you are? Any street signs?
I'm on the corner of Ashwood Rd and Berch Lane. It's next to a gas station.
What gas stations?
I just got back from Walmart and shopped for toys. I'm going to give them to the Salvation Army.
Wow. That's really nice of you to buy toys. I didn't know Salvation Army collected toys.
Yeah, it is part of the Christmas toy drive. They give new toys to children in foster care.
What did you buy?
A couple of dolls and some outfits for them.
I'm sure the kids will appreciate it.
Just coming from the children's charity home.
To Do what?
I bought a bag full of toys to give to them.
That's nice of you.
Yeah, thanks.
Keep it up.
Walgreens was selling big bags of toys for a discounted price, so I bought one
What kind of toys?
The bags are sealed so you can't tell, my bag was full of toddler toys
That is a really cool idea, but talk about hit or miss
Exactly! The toys are too young for my kids so I gave them to the children's society
That was so nice of you, I am sure they appreciated that!
Hey, Hey, Hey, What are you doing?
We need to finish this homework.
Let's play some games. What do you Got? What else? Anything else? I don't get this!
I forgot I have a dance lesson at 7 tonight. Do you think your mom can pick you up early
Aubrey, your family is so disgusting and your house needs cleaned.
Why would you say such a mean thing, Taylor?
Because it's true. It smells, Aubrey.
Taylor, I think you should leave my house.
Good! I don't want to stay anyway!
Goodbye.
Do you want to come over and play video games with me tonight? I have a game called in the world!
Is that the new RPG everyone is talking about?
Yeah it is super fun and the graphics are sick.
Yeah sure I can come over, do I need to bring a controller?
No it is only single player but you can if you want to play other games too.
Ok I will bring mine as well then.
My favorite game is the world.
I’ve never heard of that game?
It just came out about a month ago.
I’m gonna have to come over and play it with you.
That would be a lot of fun.
When can we get this done?
I'm so excited about my new Xbox One S.
Cool, what games are you playing?
I've been playing a lot of Call of Duty.
Do you have that one on Play Station too?
No, but I like playing Fortnite on the PlayStation along with other games like Paintball.
That's cool. Those all sound like fun.
I really love this new game on my Xbox!
What game is it?
It is called Dark Souls, it is a lot of fun!
You love every game though don't you?
Just about! I am a sucker for video games.
Do you mind if I don't go to the movies with you today?
You don't wanna go? How come?
I just kind of want to stay home and spend the afternoon playing video games.
You do that all the time. Doesn't it get boring?
Not for me. There are too many cool games to ever be bored.
All right, I guess I'll find somebody else to go with me.
I've finished organizing everything in the apartment.
You're a very orderly person, aren't you?
I hate looking for things and not knowing where something is when I need to use it.
Yeah, I've been trying to get more organized lately too.
I hate it when I waste my time looking for things I've misplaced.
That's a lot of wasted time.
I used to do that a lot when I was younger, but now I am more disciplined and put things away where they belong.
I need to start doing that. I am still wasting time looking for things.
It puts my mind at peace knowing that everything is where it should be.
Peace is what we are all striving for.
I finish registering for classes for this semester.
I’m so proud of you.
I talked about it but it took me a while to finally do it.
The fact of the matter is, you did it.
I’m nervous about my first class.
What time is it going to be?
Can you take Poncho out for his walk today? I have class.
Yeah, sure. Just give me your keys later. I thought you were taking evening classes though?
I was last semester but my work shifts changed so I signed up for classes at noon.
Oh okay, what are you studying?
Anthropology and marketing this semester.
I took the anthro class last year. I can lend you my notes.
I finally got all signed up for my classes at our local college!
How exciting.
Yup yup, it was hard to schedule everything around my part time job but I think it is all going to work out.
How did you end up scheduling it all?
Well, since I work mornings I decided not to pick any classes that start before noon.
Smart idea, keep things separate.
We are going to be 9th graders!
I am so scared to be going to this huge school!
We are going to do great, I am so excited that you are going to be in all by classes!
Me to, we will have each other to talk to.
I've waited for this moment for forever.  I can't believe I am going to high school with my best friend.
That's nice that you have a best friend at the high school already.
Sam and I met a couple of years ago. He's a couple years older than me but he's so good to me.
You guys will become even closer.
I think so.  We can carpool to and from school.  He drives now and said he would give me a ride.
That's very nice of him.  You are getting your car soon right?
Hey guys do you want to help me with a project?
Sure Jesse what are you doing?
I'm making posters to protest in the black lives matter demonstration downtown.
I heard about that isn't it sometime this weekend.
Yes, it's supposed to be near the mayor's office.
Ok, sure we'll help you out Jesse. We'll even come to the protest with you.
I think I have to quit the team.
Why would you do that? You love playing basketball.
Yeah, but I'm really bad at it. I also think the other guys on the team hate me.
I don't think it matters if you're on the team or not. As long as you enjoy it, that's all that matters.
You think so?
Yeah. Plus that team would stink with you or without you.
I hate when we have to play basketball in gym?
Why isn't it fun for you?
No one ever picks me to be on their team.
That stinks. Don't take it too hard.
I just feel like nobody likes me in class.
Well, I'm sure you'll be able to connect with some people outside of basketball.
I was playing basketball with my team yesterday, Man I am bad at basketball.
Haha, What do you mean?
My team didn't want me to be on it and now I see why.
Thats funny, but good that you realize that about yourself
I was really into house plants.  I want to put a plant in every corner of the room.
You have a green thumb.
My mom was like that so I learned to take care of plants from her.  She often poured water into jars to the fluoride would evaporate out.  That's suppose to cleanse the water.
That's a neat trick.
I end up doing the same now.  I have jars of water on my table with fluoride in them.
What are you going to do with them?
I have so many bottles of water out today.
What are you planning to do with them?
I want the chemicals to evaporate out because I am going to use them on my houseplants.
You really like those plants.
I love them and they grow so well. It's like a jungle in there.
Then I guess it's worth the extra effort to set the bottles out.
Did you know that fluoride is bad for house plants?
No, I usually just water them and they're fine.
They're not. If you don't let the fluoride out, they won't live very long.
You might be right, my plants die a lot.
If you pour the water into jars and let them sit, the fluoride will evaporate and the water will be OK to use.
Wow, I'll give that a try.
I feel like such an idiot for how bad of a situation I have myself in with class.
Why? What is going on? Did you not finish the paper?
No. I wrote it, but I didn't proofread it and I ended up failing.
That sucks. Maybe you could ask about extra credit?
I don't know I am thinking I need to do something so I don't fail the entire course.
I would just ask the teacher what you can do to try to turn it around.
I should have double checked my paper, or had someone else read it.
Was it that bad?
I didn't think so but I ended up getting a D.
A D? What did you even write about?
I don't even remember, to be honest I was trying to get it done last minute.
Well that's part of the problem, you should have started a week ago.
I can't believe I bombed this.
Didn't you study?
No, I just quickly wrote it.
You should have taken your time.
Next time I will, this grade is so bad.
Just doing better next time is all you can do.
I told my sister that we were going to the store.
Don't you think she'll find out?
If she does, it will be too late to go to the party. I just want to go somewhere without her tagging along.
I hope this doesn't cause any problems. I wouldn't mind if she came along.
Maybe next time. This time I just want to enjoy myself.
Okay. If that's the way you feel.
I love spending time with my grandkids.
Same, you should give them a treat.
Not a bad idea. I'll make treats with them.
Sounds fun.
I wonder if the answer to that is 80 percent.
I came up with 88 percent with my calculations.
Hmmm, I do think your number sounds better so I'll change it.
Well, don't trust me necessarily but I do think I did the question right.
Okay, I'm going to rework it and see if I come up with the same answer.
Great, think we can come to a conclusion on the right way to do the problem that way.
I think I know what the answer is!
No, you have it wrong, mine is correct.
Are you sure? I don’t want to look like an idiot.
Yes I double and triple checked and mine is right.
Okay, I guess we will submit your answer.
Okay, sorry but I really want to win this round.
Chris was so sick last night, I gave him some Pepto and he started to feel a little better.
He was drinking much at the party.
I told him that he was going to get sick.
Good thing he had you to give his the Pepto to help him feel better.
I told him this is the last time.
Did you take the two pills I gave you for your stomach ache? Are you feeling better?
Yes, thanks I feel better already! I was feeling really bad for awhile there, thank you.
Great! I know how it is when you feel sick at work you cannot concentrate on anything else.
I thought I was going to have to go home and miss a day of work but this medicine really settled my stomach.
Glad you are feeling better. Take some of this medicine home with you in case your stomach acts up again later.
Thanks, I think I will just rest up when I get home. Have some soup and go to bed!
I gave her something for her sinuses and she felt better immediately.
How did you know it was a sinus headache?
Because she was stuffy and pointed to the area of her head that hurt.
Good thing you were here. I was thinking about regular headache medicine.
Most people would but I get sinus headaches and knew right away.
I'm so glad she feels better.
I haven't been out all day.
How come?
I was home working on this project all day instead of hanging with friends
That was a good move. Work before play.
It was so wonderful to see Aubrey driving by!
Why is that?
My car broke down and I had to pull over to the side of the road.
And Aubrey was driving by and spotted you?
That’s correct. She called an emergency number and drove me home.
What a kind gesture!
Aubrey saw our car break down
That is some pure luck! Did she help you?
Yeah offered us a ride to the nearest mechanic
I love how efficient she is
I hope my car can get fixed soon
I'll give you a ride if you need it
Look at these texts I got from Aubrey.
Oh my god. She is such a jerk. I can't believe she called you ugly.
Am I ugly?
Kai, you are stunning. Aubrey is jealous of you because she likes your boyfriend. She is telling everyone that you don't deserve him.
Aubrey likes Jeff? Should I be worried?
Absolutely not. Everyone she talks to tells her she's an idiot. She is a troll and you are so much better than her.
Aubrey is really a terrible person. She's been sending mean texts to me.
Aubrey...really? What did she say?
Same thing over and over. She tells me how ugly I am.
Don't think about that. She's just projecting how she feels about herself on to you.
I hope that's the case but I'm tired of it.
I really don't know what came over me that made me called her ugly
That is bad of you!
I was in one of my mood swings and I couldn't figure out my feelings
This is getting too much, you need to get professional help
I know right, I think I need help
Let me know if I can do anything.
I really hope I get this new job
I heard they pay really well
I think it starts off at around thirty dollars an hour
It would be like a dream getting a job this great
Just try and practice what you're going to say for the interview
I told Addison to just give your name.
The plant manager had already talked to me.
Do you think that she will get the power plant job?
He is going to be offering her the position in the morning.
Jan was so energetic.  I threw the ball her way and she would chase after it.  Then brought it back to me.
Sounds like you two had a great time.
Adopting Jan from shelter was the best thing that's happened to me this year.
It's been a rotten year for most people.
Jan brings me so much joy.  She's a cute puppy that's going to grow up to be a beautiful dog.
We should schedule a play date with my dog.
Did anyone tell you that we adopted a dog from the shelter a couple of weeks ago.
No, man.  I had no idea you finally got a dog!
Yep.  I named her Jan, and she's such a sweet girl.  She's a golden retriever.
Awesome.  What kind of stuff have you done with her yet?
She loves to fetch!  We have to play fetch for at least an hour every day.  She just runs around like crazy and she will bring back anything I throw for her.
That's great, Kai.  That makes me want to get another dog so I can play fetch, too.
I had a great time playing fetch with Jan today.
I'm glad to hear it! See, I told you you'd love having a dog.
You were right. I adore Jan. She's a true companion.
I can't wait to come meet her.
Yeah, how about this weekend? We can all go down to the park and play fetch. She loves it.
That sounds great!
I feel that the teacher is asking about how we view history in the context of today.
Oh, I think it was strangely worded by Professor Beltre.
It's more of an opinion on how you feel about history as it is viewed over time.
I feel it is always changing based on today's values which are also changing.
So it's important to answer in the context of change and also see how the future may change our thoughts.
Very good response and you nailed it with your train of thought.
I was the only one who knew the teachers answer in class.
Really? You are smart. What was the question?
It was about George Washington's early life.
Oh I know you are an expert on everything about early America.
That's my favorite subject. I'm going to ace this test.
I think I'm the smartest kid in my class.
Really. Why do you think so?
I was the only person to answer my teacher's hard question.
Nice. Don't make people too jealous.
I really enjoy my new job as a bartender.
How so?
I enjoy mixing drinks and tossing the bottles into the air, in a fancy way.
That sounds fun.
Yes it does. It's like putting on a show.
I definitely need to visit you at work when I can.
I had a really great night bar tending downtown this evening.
Really? How much did you make in tips?
I got almost $100 and I was only there 3 hours because I had to leave early.
Wow, that's amazing. How did you get so much?
I have been studying how to be a great bar tender and doing different tricks and moves while making the drinks.
That's cool, I always admired how good bar tenders make drinks so quickly.
I got over $300 in tips last night!
Are you still bartending?
Yes! And I learned all kinds of cool tricks, like catching a bottle behind my back.
So cool! I want to see it!
The customers love it, and they started giving me huge tips!
That's awesome! Maybe you can take me out to dinner with all that money!
Do you know my friend Remy?  She's such a good friend.
Yes, I know Remy.  What did she do?
I have needed a place to hold company meetings for my new internet start-up, and Remy and I worked out some terms where she lets me hold the meetings at her home office.
That's good of her!  Do the meetings go well at her house?
Yes.  I had to agree that the meetings would not last more than two hours and there can be no loud noise and no smoking.
That's reasonable.  I'm glad you could work things out with Remy and have productive meetings.
I really want to have this meeting at my home?
Are you sure? I thought that we could grab coffee and have the meeting.
Yea, I really want to just have it at my house.
That sounds great then. It's a plan!
Okay, no problem at all. 10 o clock would be perfect.
Agreed! That's a plan. Let's go for it.
This project is miserable, I think we'll be here at least a few more hours.
Time for some more coffee?
It'll keep me up the rest of the night, but sure.
Mind if I have a sip?
Sure, no problem.
Thanks, I can't wait to finish this presentation.
We were up so late last night, trying to finish up that presentation
Did Jan stay and help you finish it?
Yeah, we just kept making pots and pots of coffee, by the last cup we were so tired, Jan took a sip out of mine.
Good thing there were two of you to finish it and coffee!
Yeah, we presented it this morning and the investors were very impressed with all the details.
Kendall's project was almost ruined by pranksters.
Was this the statue she's working on in her front lawn?
Yeah, I caught the kids from two houses down.
Were they about to inflict some real damage?
Not really, but it would have been a chore to clean all the silly string off the statue.
She should keep the statue in her fenced back yard.
Man this was a little wild.
What happened now?
Well I saved Kendall's project from crashing and then ran a press conference to point out the guilty guys.
Oh wow bro.
Happy birthday dad!
Thank you very much, I'm glad you remembered.
Of course I remembered, and I hope you are having a good day.
I am having a good day, thanks for asking.
What are you going to do today?
I am just going to relax and enjoy some time to myself.
I remembered it was my dad's birthday.
When did you remember?
Not until a few moments ago.
What did you do?
It was too late to get a card or a present so in order to wish him a happy birthday we sent him a text.
That is not very personal but at least you acted.
My dads birthday was yesterday.
Did you call to wish him a happy birthday?
He couldn't take a phone call, but I was able to text him happy birthday.
How much longer is he going to be on that show?
My Dad's birthday is today. I sent him a text to wish him a happy birthday.
That's really sweet of you to do
It's the least I could do considering all that he has done for me
Now you are making me feel guilty as sometimes I forget my Dad's birthday
You should make a greater effort to remember it, I'm sure he'd appreciate it
Thanks, I'm going to try to remember it from now on
My car finally died the other day.
You've been expecting that to happen, right?
Yeah, the engine was acting up so I knew it was only a matter of time.
Now what? Are you going to junk the car or what?
I totally dismantled the engine yesterday. Now I'm just trying to figure out the problem.
Good luck. I think that the car is probably beyond help at this point, but I wish you well.
I broke apart my car's engine down to the block.
Really? Can you get fix it?
I don't know. But the car just doesn't work and I think I have to rebuild the engine.
So you are trying to start from scratch?
Yes. I will try to build my own engine now.
Good luck. I can't wait to hear how it goes.
I can't go to the ballgame today. I'm working on my car.
Did it break down again?
Yeah, it's a Jaguar so it is what it is. It stopped running completely so I took apart the engine.
Did you find out what was wrong exactly?
Not yet. But I'm sure I'll figure it out by the end of the day. Hopefully I can get the parts I need.
Well if you need a ride to the auto part store just let me know.
I had to fix my car after it stopped running.
What seemed to be the problem.
After I took apart the engine, I realized it was the crankshaft.
It helps that your dad taught you so much so you could fix the car yourself.
It helps my grandfather was a mechanic.
Will your kids still know how cars work?
Have you heard from Taylor this week?
No. I called him Tuesday but he didn't answer. Why?
Last week he said he had a sore throat and a headache but he doesn't have insurance. I gave him some cough syrup with codine but it was expired. I wanted to check on him.
Did you call him?
I called him and I stopped by his house. His car was in the drive-way but no one answered. Do you think we should get into his house to check on him?
It might be a good idea. I hope he is okay.
She was sick!
She should visit her doctor!
She said no! Taylor gave them some of my left over medicine from when I was sick
But, that isn't right. She should see her doctor.
I'll tell her again.
Taylor was sick.  I gave him my leftover medicine from when I was sick.
Why is he sick?
He said he went for a midnight swim in the ocean.   The water was cold as ice.  He thinks he got sick from that.
Hope your medicine helps him.
I took that when I had a cold so they should provide him with some relief.
He doesn't usually get sick.  Taylor is a strong guy.
If my plans are correct I should be able to escape by reaching the other side of this fence.
Hey Cameron! What are you doing back there?
Not So Loud! You scared me. I'm escaping from prison.
What! You really gonna make a run for it?
Yeah, give me a lift. Help me over this fence.
Okay Cameron. Good luck on the other side bro.
I want to go away for sometime to somewhere quiet where I can be alone.
Why would you want to do that?
I need some peace and I found a great isolated cabin in the woods.
Okay that's great if that would make you feel better.
I'm not sure if that will work. And I have to come back home at some point
Okay sweetie, I am always here for you.
I'm going to finally move into the cabin by the woods.
Why?
Because being away will give me peace
Yes, the world can be hectic man.
Yup, that's why I'm making the move to the cabin.
It should be a good feeling.
We decided to move a cabin in the woods away from everyone to get some peace.
So did that work for you?
No, because we didn't get rid of our cell phones or computers.  People were still contacting us non stop.
So what did you do.
We decided to turn everything off for a few days. It was hard at first, but we did end up being left alone.
I'm glad that worked out for you.
I just put some of the produce I grow in the store.
Oh, that's cool. So is it organic?
Yes, it's organic. I really want to help the community be able to have high quality produce.
Is it expensive though?
No, I made it really low cost. You should check it out and help me promote it.
I will do that!
I did my first big sale at the farmer's market today.
What did you bring to sell?
I've been growing vegetables in that field of ours for a while so I wanted to share them with everyone and turn a profit.
And you sold all of them?
Yes and managed to make some cash too.
That's a good way to put your produce to work for you.
There was a cute village I stayed in for a few days during my travels.
Did you do a lot of things there?
I did everything there.
So you're back on the road now?
Yeah, I'm resuming my journey.
That's the life of a traveller.
I love to travel.
Have you been to Ireland?
I stayed in a small village there for several days and saw everything there was to see.
Were you bored at that point?
No, but I wanted to resume our journey.
You're like that song - On the road again.
I just wanted you to know that I'm going to be leaving the village.
Is there something wrong?
No, not at all. I've just stayed here for several days and feel like I've seen everything there is to see.
I guess that's a good reason to move on.
I'll be sad to go, but as a traveller, I have to resume my journey.
I wish you luck on the rest of your travels.
Those little guys shouldn't get in my way.
Why'd you knock them to the ground?
We need to beat that soccer team to go to the championship.
But you could hurt them.
I got the goal!
You're a poor sport and a bully.
I knocked several smaller players to the ground in soccer.
Were they hurt?
I don't think so they got back up quickly to chase after me.
You are fast when you are playing.
I am one of the fastest on the team. We run around the field before practice.
You are such an athlete.
This is great.
Yeh, their players are so small, you're just been knocking them to the ground.
Soccer is fun when you're winning or not.
This could be our first win of the season.
I hope we'll win.
Great work Remy--another goal!
Man, when it comes to Alex, it is never easy to get an attitude change in him.
I have never been successful myself winning any arguments with Alex, how did you do it?
When it comes to Alex, you have to come up with some really good arguments and logic, otherwise its in one ear and out the other.
But its hard to come up with good arguments with Alex because he's the master of arguments.
He might be the master of arguments, but he's not the master of logic, which is where his weakness is.
Well, sounds like you know exactly how to spin this one!
I changed his mind on many things
Oh you mean Alex with his weird ideas ?
Yea but I proved my logic and had good arguments and that might have changed his mind
You are very smart
No I just wanted to prove him wrong basically
Guess where I'm going on spring break?
I bet it's someplace warm!
You got that right! I just booked a room at a swanky hotel in the Bahamas!
Wow! That must have cost a lot!
It did, but it'll be worth it. I just love to travel, and I've always wanted to go to the Bahamas!
I've been there, I know you'll love it!
Want to know about my trip?
Sure give me the details.  I know you love to travel.
I am going to the Bahamas.
That's great.
I'll be staying at a luxurious all-inclusive resort.
Living the good life.
I'm going to the Bahamas!
Oh, you are always traveling.
Not as much as I would like.
Are you staying at one of those all inclusive resorts?
Yes, I am. I can't wait.
It'll be awesome.
The fire started in the kitchen.  I smelled something burning so I grabbed the extinguisher and put it out.
You saved your house.
It would have been disastrous if I wasn't home.
What was burning?
One of the dish towels fell onto the stove and caught fire.
That's dangerous.
I was so scared that I couldn't get the fire extinguisher figured out in time.
Well you obviously figured it out. You put the fire out in seconds.
It felt like hours to me.
How did it happen?
My mom was cooking fried chicken and the oil got too hot I guess.
She was really grateful you put out the fire before it burned down the house.
That fire was getting completely out of control so fast
Thank god you were here on time and no one got hurt
I could see the flames from outside the house and ran over here as fast as I could
I'm just glad someone saw the fire before it got too big to contain
You're a hero. I hope you get a reward for this
There was a fire in my house, it was devastating
I didn't hear about this are you alright?
Yes I grabbed the fire extinguisher and blew it out in the kitchen
That's such a relief! Is the house okay?
Yes I stopped it from encasing the whole house
You're a hero
Lee and I are going to the cabin this weekend.
It must be nice to be married to a doctor who can afford a cabin.
It is. Imagine if Lee had become a teacher like he wanted. We would be so poor!
It's a good thing you convinced him to become a doctor instead.
I know! I think next year I am going to tell him I want to get pregnant.
That might be interesting.
I know you wanted to be a teacher and I convinced you to become something else .
I know and now I'm a doctor.
Do you regret this?
No, I make more money these days.
Okay good.
You're a great person.
When I first met Lee he was going to school to be a teacher.
How did he end up becoming doctor?
We were going to a concert and a car hit us head on. Lee saved my life, by pulling me out of the burning car.
So he decided he wanted to save lives?
I wonder what would've happened if I never convinced Lee to be a teacher
You're the one who convinced himh to be a doctor
I think so, yeah.
I can't imagine Lee as a teacher
Me neither
He is a great doctor
It sucks that I have to spend the rest of my life in jail.
What are you in jail for?
I killed my children.
Was it an accident?
Not really .
Wow I don't know what to say.
I thought I could hide my weed from my mom very well
Why did she find it or something ?
Yes she did , I should have hid it better
Why don't you put it in the cupboard ?
She would find it anywhere since she does spring cleaning and cleans all part of the home
You are so out of luck then
I hid weed from my mom.
And has she found out?
Yes, she did.
How come?
She was doing a spring cleaning.
That's bad news.
I recently watched a program that taught me about the dangers of sun exposure.
Yes, I got a bad sunburn just the other day.
Well I wasn't about to let that happen to Quinn so I put sunblock on her and kept her under an umbrella at the beach.
You're such a good mother.
She complained about the situation but it's for her own good.
Of course it is.
Did you see that special on the news last week about childhood sun over exposure.
No I didn't, I am sure we weren't suppose to run around naked like we did as kids back in the day.
Not at all, even one burn as a child could lead to skin issues and cancer later on in life.
It can't be that bad, we're all fine now.
I am following their advice, when I took Quinn to the beach she stayed in the shade or was wearing one of those UV blocking long sleeve shirts and sunscreen.
I guess as new information becomes available, we have to adjust to what is best for the safety of our children.
Did you know the sun can be harmful to human beings?
I've heard that the UV rays can cause skin cancer.
That is true. So I am taking some measures to protect Quinn from cancer.
How wise of you! Children are even more susceptible than children.
I don't want my baby getting harmed.
He is going to grow to a handsome and healthy person.
Did you read my article?
No. Why? What was in it?
It was a discussion of the black lives matter incident last week.
The one where the guy died.
Yes that one. I talked about the situation from the perspective of Riley the victim.
Oh yeah. I heard the article won an award. I've been meaning to read it.
I just finished that article I was telling you about.
Okay cool. What was it about?
I gave an in depth analysis of Rileys perspective.
Oh that sounds interesting.
Yes hopefully everyone else thinks so too!
I hope so for your sake as well.
I think I can teach people the value of cooking at home
Have you showed them the value of what Riley said in her report
I showed them an analysis of her perspective on cooking  versus eating out in my article
I was surprised by how much money people can save
It really does seem to add up after awhile
I cannot get through to Austin.
What was the fight about?
Cheerios are easily better that Coco Puffs.
Huh?  It was about something that stupid?
How is cereal stupid?
Because its just a bunch of sugar!
Austin, I did not come to your house to argue about this!
I don't see why you can't understand my point of view here!
I just can't, it makes zero sense! I just don't get it or agree with it
Well that's too bad, I'm not changing my opinion and I don't care what you think
Fine, if you don't care then I'm leaving
Good I'm tired of fighting about it! BYE
I hope Alex doesn't get mad at me but I gave her number to someone, for myself.
She probably won't mind. You'd do it for her.
I met this really cute guy and I don't have a phone right now so I used hers.
Just let her know and she'll help out.
I hope it's okay that I gave some cute guy I'm interested in your number.
Why didn't you give him your number?
I broke my phone the other day and didn't have a number to give him.
So what should I do if he calls my phone?
Just act like you're me and set up the date.
How cute was he?
I really think I want to spend the rest of my life with Aubrey!
Why do you think that?
Because since we started dating last summer, I enjoy spending so much time with her.
Does she have any children?
Yes, she has two children. I love her children as if they were my own.
That sounds so great, I am happy for you!
Can you believe it's been a whole year since I started dating Aubrey?
Is that right? Oh yeah, you guys started going out last August, didn't you?
Sure did. Back when I figured it would just be a short romance.
You never know how these things are going to end up.
So true. Like, I never expected I would become so close with her kids.
Well, you're really great with them. It's like you guys were meant to be a family.
I wanted to surprise their girlfriend by showing up at the airport so they cancelled plans they had with others.
Did it work.
No we were late so she took a train.
Is she getting a drop at the restaurant.
Yea we will meet her there.
Cool!
Sorry I had to cancel plans last weekend.
Meeting your girl at the airport, was more important.
I just wanted to surprise her and make her feel special.
Your such a sweet boyfriend, that you care about her feelings.
My girlfriend is here this weekend. I surprised her by showing up at the airport to pick her up. She was really happy.
That's a nice thing to do. I thought you were going camping with a group.
I was but that was before my girlfriend decided to come. I cancelled my plans for camping.
You'll have a much better time at home than camping, anyway.
You're English is getting better.
You're a good friend to help me.
Well, it's important to speak good English to succeed.
My parents only speak Spanish at home.
I know it's tough, but you're doing great.
Thanks so much for helping me.
You picked up reading English so fast did you study it before you came to America
I studied about three years in Mexico and did pretty well in school
I can tell you knew a little bit before I taught you because you seemed to understand it fine
It is always better to be prepared I guess
Alex, lets start with One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish..
But I don't like math! No way.
Alex, this will help with your English! Lets try Green Eggs and Ham. Is a classic book!
No, I am really allergic to eggs. The thought of eggs makes me sick!
Okay, Cat in the Hat? Fox in Socks? or Horton Hears a Who?
What about this one? Tolstoy's War and Peace. This is the one!
I've been spending some of my free time teaching Alex how to read English.
That's really nice of you.
I'm happy to do it. He's such a hard worker.
Is he getting better at reading English?
He can read a whole book now.
That's something I can't ever do even though English is my native language.
My mother is in trouble again.  She can't afford to take care of her babies.  I don't know why she keeps having them.
How many kids does your mom have?
Too many. She doesn't take care of any of us.
That's too bad.  What are you going to do?
I am making money now.  I want to get sole custody of the babies, build a nursery and take care of them.
That's ambitious.
Boy, if I ever needed some good luck, now is the time.
Why, are you playing the lottery?
No, something better. I entered that contest, the one with the huge cash prize.
Oh, yeah, that's a nice prize. Definitely a life changer.
I need that money so badly. I'm praying that I win.
I hope you do, too. That would be great.
The only reason I entered the contest was for the money.  The top prizes are pretty sweet.  They are massive cash rewards.
If you win, you can pay off your debt.
That's what I am thinking.  I can use that money.
What contest did you enter?
It's an eating contest.  The one who eats the most food within a certain time period wins prizes.  They have multiple rounds so there are multiple winners.
I know you are an eater.  Hope you win.
I just lost my job and I need some money.
Now is your chance to shine. Join the singing contest.
Yeah right! I heard they have big cash prizes for the winners.
Can you imagine winning the grand prize?
Yes, that would be a great help in my finances.
Go for it!
I hope I win the contest because I really can use the money.
What are you going to do with the money if you win?
I am going to use it to get a new car, maybe a new house and take a trip.  I'm tired of renting and my car needs so much work, it doesn't make sense to keep it.
Do you really think you have a chance at winning? It seems like a lot of people have entered the contest.
I know, but I've just got a good feeling about it.  I'm due for a break.
Well, good luck.  If you win, we'll go out and celebrate.
I hope I win this contest because I need this cash badly.
I think you have a great shot because that was a great piece of artwork you entered.
Thanks, I worked a long time on that.
How much money is first place?
It’s $5000.
Wow, that is a nice chunk of change.
I would like to thank you for taking my mom out to lunch yesterday
It's no problem. I had a buy one get one free coupon
Things have been so hard since we live out of state and are finding our way around
I guess the city is too big and the traffic is pretty bad too
I appreciate it.
I'm glad I could help
I def owe you back
I know you would help me anytime
Your mom is great.
Yea it's amazing.
I can't believe I killed Sydney.
What happened?
I was driving and not paying attention when I hit her car.
Why weren't you paying attention?
I was on my phone texting.
I don't know what to say .
I literally cannot believe what had happened during the crash yesterday.
I know you feel terrible, but at some point you will find peace.
I just cannot believe that their lives were ruined simply because I was not paying attention.
I know, this is why you should never text and drive.
I wish I had listened to those ads before.
I will help you through this, we can get through this together.
I was involved in a nasty accident today with Kendall.
I'm so sorry. I hope you're both alright.
I am well but unfortunately Kendall died on the spot.
That is very heart breaking.
It is all my fault. I lost focus and hit her car.
Have you filed a police report?
I know Ash would not have killed that person intentionally.
Well, so do I, Quinn. I'm sure whatever happened was a mistake.
No, I mean that Ash didn't kill them, period. It was just a careless accident. They fell off the roof when Ash was up there installing the antenna.
So, you don't think Ash got mad at them and insulted them?
Of course I don't. It was just stupidity. They were both a bit tipsy and unsteady on their feet.
I understand. They didn't have any right to be up there in the first place.
We are not robbers.
I think Ash would be though.
Ash is so nice once you know him.
Ash once punched me in the face.
You kicked him first.
Because he punched my dog!
Hey do want to have a bonfire?
Is that even safe?
Sure it is. Please hand me the lighter.
Here is the lighter.
Okay, I am going to light the fire underneath the brush.
Wow, that fire is massive.
I tried to start a fire in the pit last night .
Was it nice? You have such a great backyard.
Yeah. So warm on a cold night.
Sounds awesome.
Are you coming to my house Friday?
What do you have planned?
We are toasting marsh mellows and roasting hot dogs.
I didn't know you had a grill.
I decided to light a fire under the brush in my pit in the backyard.
You can count me in and I'll bring a fire extinguisher, too.
How do you think a pit fire looks?
It looks so warm and inviting.
I just thought it would be a good idea to do it since it's a cold Friday night.
Have you tried cooking hotdogs on it?
Why do you ask?
I'm kind of hungry.
I am so sorry everyone, I ate taco bell before this and my stomach is hurting so bad.
Why don't you got to the bathroom?
Yeah I am going, but it is hard to move because my stomach hurts so bad.
I can help you to the bathroom, but you should probably leave until everyone else isn't mad anymore.
I really did not mean to make such a loud noise.
I know, but people seem to be pretty upset about the noise you made.
I am so sorry I did not mean to make that loud commotion.
Its ok just be quiet now and sit down?
Again I am so sorry  forbeing so loud.
Just sit down you are making a scene.
The only thing on my mind is winning the championship right now.
You guys are the team to do it.
We just have to work together to achieve a common goal of a championship.
Then you’ll get to go to Disney World.
That would be the cherry on top for me.
Then it’s time to get down to business because you need to achieve this goal to get there.
Guys do you think we could win the title and go to Disney World?
I think we can! We just need to practice a lot
Me too! Let's make a schedule so we don't slack on practicing
Sure. What days work for you
I can do everyday but Tuesday
Perfect! Lets practice on Mondays
I really want to win a title this year and get a free trip to Disney World for the family.
Your kids will really enjoy Disney. Be grateful it will be free because they are very expensive.
I'm glad I joined this team. They are very good, so there is a good chance.
What sport do you do? You've never told me.
Nascar driver. It's really a rush!
I've never heard of that. I'm so surprised, as long as we have been friends, you never told me.
Are you o.k.--that was a bad fall?
My ankle is killing me.
I'm afraid it looks like a break.
Great--that damn bike.
Just stay still--I'll call for help.
Hurry please!
I had an accident on my bike.
Was it bad?
I fell and broke my ankle.
Are you ok?
I am stuck in bed but Alex stopped in to check and see if I was okay.
He is a good friend.
Where are you going for your annual vacation this year?
I might go up to my cabin in Lake Tahoe. Would you like to come and join me?
I would love to. What should I bring?
Don't worry about it. I got everything taken care of.
Do I need my own snow gear and skiing equipment?
No. We will get some rental when we get there
Hey Carter! I wanted to ask you, do you have plans for the weekend of memorial day?
I do not, we were supposed to go to Laura's house, but you know.
Right, are you dealing with the news ok?
I guess, it sucks, I miss her a lot but I don't think I can handle it.
Well if you're interested, the guys and I are going camping for the three days, do you want to join?
Oh yes, that sounds amazing actually.
I had to wear shoes this time because I burned my feet on the hot concrete last time
I bet that really hurt. did you get any burns?
I lost a little skin on my heel but nothing too bad
That's good. At least you were not seriously hurt
I will never do that again
I did something dumb.
Would you like to tell me about it?
I burned my feet on the road.
Weren't you wearing shoes?
Not the last time but next time I will wear shoes when I walk down the road in the blazing summer heat.
You learn quickly my friend.
I thought it would be nice to walk barefoot in the summer.
That sounds relaxing.
But I ended up burning my feet.
That explains your trip to the shoe store.
Man please remind me never to do that again. The road was so stinging hot.
What are you talking about?
I tried to walk on the road without shoes, that was a bad idea. I had to run home and grab some shoes.
Yea these summer days can make the roads feel like lava.
Haha your right about that.
I'm so sad about Sydney.
I know, he will be remembered as a great pirate.
Lets have a drink of rum in his memory.
Cheers, for Sidney and all of his adventures.
For Sidney, may he rest in peace.
For Sidney, he now travels in the seas of heaven.
I proclaim thee, Sydney, of free soul and free of earthly harm.
I wish the best for you, Sydney, a true adventurer at sea.
May the winds take you to the heavens that you seek.
May your soul continue to navigate the seas which you claimed as your own.
Sydney, you were a great first mate and a mighty fine pirate.
May you rest in peace with your ship!
Sydney kicked me this morning.
Why would she do that to you?
She wanted me to get out of bed.
Oh. Well, it is pretty hard to get you out of bed.
My shine is sore.
Did you hurt yourself?
On the bus this morning I fell asleep and when we got to school Sydney kicked me in the shine to wake me up.
That wasn't very nice.
She said it was only suppose to be a light kick but she didn't know her own strength.
Yeah, sure. I hope she apologized.
Sydney, wake up already!
Ouch! Why did you kick me!
You've been sleeping for an hour, it is time to get off the bus!
Oh shoot, why didn't you wake me earlier?
I tried to but you pushed me away!
Get up Sydney you're not going to be late again
Ow Addison you didn't have to kick me
Mom put me in charge
yeah yeah fine I'm getting up
Eat something too
Fine I'll have cereal
Hey, why did you kick me? I still have time before I have to leave!
Get out of bed! The bus will be here any minute and you’re not even dressed!
It takes two seconds for me to get dressed! Worry about yourself!
Fine! I don’t care if you miss the bus and be late!
Great! Now get out of my room before I kick YOU!
Grrr....whatever.
I hate it here.
You hate it in Cancun? Are you nuts?
Yes it sucks. It's too warm and sunny. And I hate the ocean.
Wow I wish my parents had taken me to Cancun. I'm stuck here back at home.
I'd trade spots with you in a second! I hate going on trips.
It's too bad we're not twins. We should switch like in that movie.
I really don't want to be here.
Why?
Because I'm not happy with this trip.
It's spring break man, enjoy it.
I can't bro.
Well, stop pissing and moaning about it and let others enjoy it.
I am so excited you  guys, guess what?
What happened?
I aced all of my classes! I want to throw a party.
That's amazing man, I am so proud of you. When should we have this party?
I was thinking about next Saturday.
Sounds great !
I'm so happy that I'm done with my first semester of college.
How did you do?
I got straight A's!
Congratulations! You should celebrate.
I am, I decided to throw a party to celebrate.
Can I come to the party too?
Hey dude, come to my party Saturday night at 8, it's going to be a blast!
Sure! What are we celebrating?
Me making my mama proud with straight A's in my first semester of college!
Congrats! Good job, that isn't an easy task.
It wasn't too bad, you just have to stay focused
Good thing you did, now we get to party down haha
I'm throwing a big party tonight and I wanted to know if you'd like to come.
Yeah, I'm free. What's the party for?
I'm celebrating my straight A grades at college.
Wow, congratulations! That definitely deserves a party.
Yeah, I've done a great job during my first semester.
Today was so hectic that I didn't even get a chance to eat.
Oh, no. That's not good for you at all.
I know. When I got home I found some leftover tacos in the fridge and ate them.
Wait, those were my leftovers! I was going to have them for lunch tomorrow.
Oh, oops, I'm really sorry. I'll take you out for lunch tomorrow to repay you.
Okay, fair enough. I accept your apology.
I'm feeling a bit queasy.
Oh no, did you eat something bad?
I might have. I found some leftover tacos in the refrigerator and ate them when I got home. I was too busy to eat all day and was so hungry.
Wait, not the tacos that I left there a month ago I hope!
Oh geez, I don't know. Maybe. They had a lot of guacomole in them.
I think that was mold, not guacamole. You'd better go to the hospital!
Thank goodness for leftovers!  Today has been a long and hectic one, I didn't have time to eat lunch.
I hate when that happens.  What'd you end up eating.
I had taco fixings leftover from Tuesday's dinner.
That sounds good.  I wish I had some tacos right about now.  I'm starving!
I make them at least once every week because they not only taste good, but they're so quick and easy to prepare.
Sounds delicious.  Tomorrow is taco night at my house!
I was playing with my dog like all day today.
Is that why you didn't answer my call?
Yeah, sorry, what's up?
Nothing, how is your puppy?
She is good, she is getting bigger everyday.
Awe, I want to come and see her.
I stayed out till it was dark.
How come you stayed this long?
I was playing with my dog.
Did you play that long?
Yes, I did.
Wow sounds like you had fun
I had the best day ever yesterday!
That's awesome! What did you do?
I just played with my dog until it got really late!
Honestly that sounds like so much fun!
Yeah I definitely needed it after my last week at work
There’s nothing that a dog can’t fix!
I love playing with this dog!
I know right, isn't she so cute?
She really is! We've been out here until it was dark!
I know! Totally worth it though!
Agreed! What a blast!
I took my dog out for a walk today.
I bet the poor boy was dying for something outdoorsy.
Yeah, I took its favorite plush toy with me.
And what did you do with that?
We played a game of catch till it was dark.
Whoa! That must have been so much fun.
I am so sorry to hear that you hurt your head.  I wish that you have an awesome and speedy recovery my friend
Thank you. The head trauma was severer but it is manageable with pain medication here and there.  I am lucky to be alive
Sure you are! I hope you have learned a valuable lesson about staying safe
I really have.  I appreciate you being here and supporting me the whole way through.  You are such a good friend
Of course. I'm happy to help you
You are! Thanks
Are you all right?  That was a bad fall.
My head hurts.
You have a bump on your head.
It really hurts.
Here, press this iced towel to your head.  That will help.
I hope so.  Thank you.
Here take this ice pack
Thanks, is it bleeding?
No but you do got a big egg
It hurts a lot
You fell from the top of the slide maybe we should call your mom
Yeah I think so too
I love you and I think you might feel the same way for me.
Wow, I didn't know you felt that way about me.
I do. Do you feel the same?
I think I do. I think we would work great together.
I love you.
I love you too.
I finally just broke down with Casey and let him cry in my arms as I cried into his!
What was he even crying about? I have never seen a man cry.
Just life, love, heartache and all the things he had been threw, it was like he had never had anyone really listen to him before.
Do you think he knows how much you love him now and that you are not going to hurt him?
I certainly hope he understands that all I want is his love, and nothing else.
Well if he doesn't understand that, than I am not sure what he will understand.
Guess what today is?
April 1st?
Yup! I just pranked my parents and they got so mad at me! They should know better as it's a tradition.
Oh no! What did you do this time?
I switched out the sugar with salt. My parents spit out the coffee when they tasted the salt!
That's not nice. You better not prank me!
I love it when April arrives.
Do you have special occasions during April?
Yes! I played prank on my parents because it was first of April.
Ohhh! Seems you enjoy playing pranks on them
Sure! it is our tradition.
Good.
I really got my parents good today.
What do you mean by that?
I played a prank on them.
Why would you do that?
It's the first of April.
I can't believe I forgot. I wanted to play a prank on you too.
I had to fill in for Mrs. Barnes for the field trip.
Where did you guys go?
It was a trip to an art museum, the kids learned so much and were excited to see all the painting and sculptures.
Kids should have the chance to experience art in all forms. Did they keep you buys chasing them?
Oh my god, they wore me out!
I was the substitute teacher that day.
I didn't know you were a substitute teacher.
Yeah, I'm on call at the charter school.
That's nice. Do you choose the activities for the classes you teach?
Sometimes. That day I did. I took the class to the art museum.
You must be a great teacher.
I had such a fun day at the park.
It was a nice day to be at the park.
It sure was. A bunch of my friends were there and we played games all day.
Sounds like a lot of fun.
It was. I hope we do it again, soon.
Hey want to come out and play in the park later?
Yeah I am almost done with my chemistry homework.
We are playing some ultimate frisbee here so it'll be fun.
Okay, I love ultimate frisbee and play it all the time!
That's great, we're gonna be here til 3pm.
Okay, I'll see you down there soon.
You want to go to the park with me?
Sure, it looks like a nice day.
Yeah, it's supposed to be sunny all day.
What should we do at the park?
We should play games with all our friends.
That'll be a lot of fun.
It is the perfect weather for a fun activity, don't you think?
That is true! We can play Capture-the-flag.
Sheesh-kebab! I left the my flags at home.
I did not bring mine either.
How about Frozen tag?
Yes. Look! Your mum. Tag, you're it!
I told Remy how to get financially organized.
How did Remy receive the advice?
Everything I said about going to work on time and paying bills seemed to fall on deaf ears.
I'm sure Remy has heard it all.
It's just that it's hard to not speak in generalities when it comes to this stuff, you know? How do I get through to them?
Yeah, knowing the right action doesn't seem to always motivate people.
Hi Remy. I just want to talk to you about something that is very important to me.
Sure what's up?
Great, it's very important to get to work and pay your bills on time.
I agree. But sometimes, I can't get to work on time. Sometimes, my bills are too high, and I can't pay them.
You'll need to use strategies to leave out early for work and budget your income.
Your values mean a lot to me. I'll work very hard to accomplish these goals.
I had to have a talk with Remy today about his responsibilities.
He's slacking I take it.
Yeah, I got an email today about his cell phone bill being unpaid now for over a month and his work called looking for him cause he was late.
Sounds like he's enjoying his summer a bit too much.
Indeed, I think I need to impress upon him that if he wants to keep the privilege of using the car, he needs to get to work on time and pay his bills.
I am sure once he doesn't have the car keys anymore, he will remember the values of hard work and punctuality.
That was one huge spider that was on the window
I think it was a black widow
Oh wow, I think they are really poisonous
Well, it's a good thing it's dead so it can't hurt us anymore
Man I hate spiders.
Hey be nice Skylar! That's a rare black widow!
No thanks. I hate spiders.
Aww come on! Skylar you didn't have to squash it.
Hey, you said it yourself. It was a rare and dangerous spider.
You could have moved it to another location, Skylar.
My lawyer made me a deal with the prosecutors for a lighter sentence.
What do you have to do to get it?
I just have to tell them everything I know about the other burglars.
You mean you're going to snitch on your friends?
You can call it that if you want. I'm just looking out for myself.
If I were you, I would be careful if the others find out.
It feels so good to have this business up and running with my friend.
You guys deserve it for working so hard.
Yeah, it's been our dream for the longest time.
How has business been so far?
Great. I think we're going to do well this year.
I can't wait to go and shop there.
You know how I always talked about wanting to start my own delivery business. I finally quit dreaming about it and did it!
Oh wow! How's it going so far?
Well, there's been a lot of ups and downs -- learning curves and unexpected things but overall I think it's been great.
Do you think the business will thrive even with corona virus going on?
I'm hoping now is the time it will grow the most as people are wanting things delivered instead of going out to pick them up themselves
Well, I hope it all works out for the best for you!
I'm going to have to start hiring more employees at the record store.
Wow that's really taking off for you! I'm so mad at myself for chickening out at the last minute.
Yeah I'm pretty excited at how things are going. It's hard work but it's a great feeling having your own business.
Meanwhile I sit in a cubicle all day. Darn!
Well it's never too late. And now that I know the ins and outs I can help you out. There's a space open across the street from my store.
I'll give that some consideration. Maybe I'll open up my own record store and put you out of business! Haha.
Thank you for taking the long on your job interview today.
It was coming along this way anyway, so you can pick up an application.
I hope we both get the jobs we are applying for so we can carpool together every day.
That would be so much fun and we can gossip all the way to and from work.
Good luck on your interview!
Good luck on your application too.
I really hope you get the job Jan.
Yeah me too. Hey if we're lucky maybe we can both be hired.
I hope so. I hope your interview goes well.
And I hope they accept your application, so one day you can get a big interview too.
Yeah, we'll make it too the big times.
That's the spirit Taylor.
I'm glad I came along with you for your job interview.
Why's that?
I'm going to fill out an application to work at this hotel.
Wouldn't it be great if we both got a job here.
Maybe we could commute together.
And maybe we're getting a little ahead of ourselves.
I've been meaning to apply at the hotel.
I have an interview there today. You should come along.
That would be great.  You sure you don't mind?
No, it would be great to have the company on the way.
Great, I'll get my coat.
Sounds good.
I was so scared last night, because my brother Bailey to the Dr because he was coughing up fluid last night.
What did the Doctor say?
He's ok. It's a cold.
At least it's not staying in his lungs.
That's what the Dr said. It was better that he was coughing stuff up out of his lungs.
When your folks come home they will be really glad you took care of him!
Riley has decided to start losing weight.
That's incredible! How do you feel about it?
I just want her to be happy, so whatever works for her I support.
That is really nice of you.
I have developed a new gig.
Are you selling used books out of your car trunk?
No, even better, I am selling books on facebook to all of my friends through a multi level marketing company.
You will never see the money.
Why would you say that?
I just quit a job selling books on facebook to all of my friends through a multi level marketing company.
I've been selling these books on Facebook to all of my friends.
Where do you get the books from?
From a multi-level marketing company.
Oh, so is this one of those where you want friends to sign up to?
I would like for them to. Some do. But not all.
It's good that you're not pushy.
Man were you watching yesterdays game?
You mean when you got smacked in the face with the ball
It was totally planned
I don't think it was but you kept going
Had to, what else was I? going to do
You did great
I got hit by a soccer ball in the face yesterday during the game.
Did you get hurt?
It was nothing.  I get hit all the time.
That's part of the game I guess.
It's a contact sport so I expect to get hit and get injured.
It requires a certain acceptance of the dangers to play the game.
Did you see that?
Yea, the soccer ball nailed you in the face and you didn't blink.
I know, I was really into the game.
I love your focus.
Don't freak out, but I have a black eye.
Seriously? What happened?
I got hit in the face with the ball during the soccer game yesterday.
Ouch! Are you okay?
Yeah, I think I had so much adrenaline I didn't even really notice until afterwards. It doesn't hurt much.
That's a relief. It makes my eye hurt just looking at you though.
Cameron knew I was dishonest!
You should have behaved better!
Hmm. Cameron now know when I lied to him.
Yu shouldn't lie.
Noticed today my plant named Manny just produced its first bloom
You have a plant named Manny?
Yes, I name all my plants
Why Manny for this one?
It was given to  me by my friend maned Manny that's how it got the name
that's cool, I'll give you one so I have a plant named after me too
My family moved 10 times when I was a kid.
That is a lot of moving.
It is. I was the new kid at school a lot.
Did you go to a different school every time?
I went to five different elementary schools. It was hard to make friends and keep them.
That must have been tough.
It is so hard to make any friends since I move so much.
Well I am your friend.  At least you got me.
Yes, but I wish my family would  quit moving but we have to because my dad is in the military.
Well you got me as long as you are here or as long as we stay in
Our first date was so romantic. Kai looked me in the eyes and I just melted.
I'm so glad that you two are hitting it off. Is there going to be a second date?
Definitely. We are going to a drive in movie.
That sounds romantic in an old fashioned way .
It's going to be dreamy.
It was such a romantic date with Kai.
I had no idea you guys were dating.
It was our first date.
What made it romantic?
We both looked each other in the eye during one moment.
I hope you guys go on more dates.
It was really hard to get up today.
At what time did you get up.
At 5:00 AM, I almost stayed in bed.
That is really early, do you always wake up at that time.
I do, but today I was feeling really tired.
I can imagine, you have a tough schedule.
It was a tough morning.
How's that?
I woke up at 5:00 A.M., exhausted, and then had to go right to work.
Well, either you have to go to bed earlier or get a job that doesn't start at 6:00 A.M.
Nice advice, genius.
I can see you're still tired and cranky.
The kitten looked sick
What was wrong with him?
He needed different food, the other food was bad for his stomach
Is wet food better for him?
Yes he feels a lot better now
I'm glad, poor little guy
I changed my kitten's food from that cheap stuff.
Does she like it?
She eats it and she's been acting much better.
So was the food causing problems?
It was. She is definitely more playful and happy.
I am glad no more kitten tummy aches for her.
I can feel it.
Feel what?
I can feel there is something wrong with the little baby cat.
What will you do?
Going to give it new food.
I hope that works.
I finally saw the friend I owe money to.
Did he ask for his money back?
No, but I put change in his wallet.
Great. At least you got the chance to pay him.
I'm so happy I did.
That is nice.
I put the money right back in his wallet.
That is what he told me. He thought its strange.
But I paid him back. That's what counts.
Yeah, he said; but at least I got the money back this time.
What? I don't owe him anymore money.
He appears to think otherwise.
I decided to give you back the money as change and I put it in your wallet.
You didn’t have any bills?
No, I gave you all quarters though so it would not be too much.
I guess that is ok, because last time you forgot to even pay me back.
I know and I also included that money as well.
Well that was nice of you to do.
I put the money I borrowed back in your wallet.
Thanks, but it was all change.
It was money I was keeping in a jar after emptying my pockets for months.
Well, I'm glad I at least got repaid.
I know that I still owe you from other times.
No, big deal.
Thank you all so much for being here.
How are you doing?
I'm exhausted from the delivery, but so happy.
What's the baby's name?
Oh, I haven't decided--I think she will be called Jennifer.
Good choice.
Giving birth was an amazing experience.
What is the gender of the baby?
It is a boy.
Was it just your husband in the room?
No.  There were also friends and I named the baby Casey.
That does sound like an incredible experience!
I have a big exam coming up next week.
Have you been studying?
I have been reading that book.
I only managed to get half way through it. Do you want to study together?
Sorry I can't come camping with you guys this weekend.
Oh man, why not, it's going to be great.
I have a big exam coming up for the summer program I am in and I need to finish this book for it.
Just bring the book with you, you can read by the lake or in a hammock.
I can't, it's really dense and I've already spent some time reading it and only got two chapters in.
Alright, I understand but it wont be as much fun with out you.
Hey my friend, do you want to join me studying?
How come you are reading books today?
I have a big exam soon and I want to be prepared!
Wow, that is nice!
Yeah, I have been spending most of my time reading and I am enjoying it!
Awesome, I like your attitude, keep killing it with the books.
My big exam is next week.  I am stressed about it.
Have you been studying for it?
Not as much as I need to, but I'll put in the hours this weekend.
Why don't you start now?
I am reading a book that I want to finish.  It's getting exciting.
Cool.  You've always loved to read.
My workplace gave me a huge bonus this year. It was unexpected, I was so overwhelmed.
What are you going to do with it Lee?
I am going to give it to charity.  I usually only give 10% of my income to charity, but I thought this would make a nice gift.
You are so thoughtful.  Make sure you get a receipt because you can claim it on your taxes this year.
Oh I never itemize on my taxes so I don't want a receipt.
Okay then.
It was a great game right.
I did enjoy it, what is your secret you never fumble.
I just try to concentrate on the ball on my hand.
I should try that next time I'm a terrible player.
With enough dedication you will do great.
I sure hope so,  I will practice that strategy.
I have really been trying to improve my ball handling skills.
What techniques have you found that seem to help?
Well I watched some online videos about improving it and started doing what those guys were saying.
Does it seem to be helping? Have you noticed a difference?
I think so I focused on them last game and didn't have a single fumble!
That is really impressive. You will have to show me those tricks!
Even though Caron's son is my step son I love him so much!
No one can tell that you are not his biological mother.
Yes! I love him like my own son.
I'm sure Caron appreciates that.
He does!
I love my step son.
That is because you love Caron.
I love Caron's son as my own.
He is a good kid.
I will raise him to be a good and caring kid.
You are so unlike other step mothers.
I'm a step mother.
Caron's son loves you.
Yes I would do anything for him.
He is really good.
I love him so much.
He loves you too.
Times have sure been tough lately.
They have, did you manage to find a job yet?
Not yet, I was looking at working as a waitress in a restaurant but changed my mind.
Oh, what made you change your mind?
My friend Skylar advised me against it, she said that a waitress was a dead end job.
Ah that's a shame, I'm sure you'll find something soon.
Skylar keeps interfering in my career.
In what way?
She keeps telling me that being a waitress is a dead end job, but I love what I am doing at the truck stop.
Well Quinn you are really smart, maybe Skylar has a point. What is your goal with this job
I am just working here temporarily to save up enough money so I can move out
Oh, in that case just ignore Skylar and focus on your goal.
I think I'm going to apply for a waitressing position.
That would be good way to earn some extra money
I am not sure though
Why are you unsure?
Skylar said it's a dead end job.
Don't listen to Skylar, make your own decisions
So Riley this is Mr. Catsy, my cat and best friend.
Oh cute, can I have a look at him too.
Sure, it's lunch time for him so I think he is hungry.
That explains the hungry face.
Yeah, he gets cranky if he doesn't eat, I better get him food.
You should poor Mr. Catsy.
I think my cat is hungry.
Oh, how do you know?
When cats are hungry, they lick their claws.
That's a good piece of information to know.
It just so happens that I am very in tune with my cat.
Cleary! I overheard you telling Riley that he is called Fluffy, that's a great name.
I got a cat this weekend.
Wow, I heard you telling Riley her name. I didn't even know you could have pets in that apartment?
Yeah you are allowed to have a small dog or a cat.
Well it'll be nice that you are able to have somebody to keep you company.
Sadly this cat is not great at keeping people company.
I'm sure she will warm up to you over time.
Just while I was telling Riley my cat's name, Fluffy, the cat started to show up!
Oh what a coincidence, what happened?
Riley was there watching the cat when the cat started running like crazy around the food bowl
Your cat is funny
The cat was hungry so was making a point and asking for food.
That is very cute.
So I think I can make us rich if you're willing to help me.
Wow, I'm interested! How?
I found out that I have a special gift. I can turn silver into gold.
Wow I always knew there was something odd about you! But what do you need me for?
Well I don't have any silver, and I don't have any money to buy any.
Oh, so you need me to buy some silver? I'm in!
I discovered my special super power today.
I am curious.  What is it?
I found out I can change silver into gold.
You are like one of those super heroes, are you serious?
It was probably just a chemical reaction.  I was in a chemistry lab after all.
That's amazing.
Can you believe it?
Believe what?
I have a special super power.
What super power could you possibly have?
I can transmute silver into gold.
Here, I have a silver spoon, can you show me?
If this experiment works we'll be rich forever my friends.
This is so exciting Robin, I'm sure glad you hired me as your assistant.
Pass me the chemical transmutation device and stay back please this may take a while.
Well Robin, did it work?
Look for yourself can you not see the brilliant radiance of pure gold made from nothing but silver.
Oh my God, Robin, you're a genius.
I am going to Australia next week.
Oh, you're moving again?
I have to, I need a new setting.
Since I've known you, you have moved around a lot.
That's just my way of life.
Well, I am definitely going to miss you.
I have moved 10 times in the last 2 years.
Why do you keep moving so much?
There is no place that feels like home without her.
I am sorry that Amy died, but you need to settle down and go on with life.
That is the thing, I don't know if I want to.
I think that you need to go and talk to someone about your feelings.
I can't seem to find a good house here
There are so many houses around Sydney, you just need to keep looking and I am sure you could find one
I know, but every time I seem to find a good one I always find a fault in it.
Sydney, maybe the reason you can't find one is because you have very high expectations
So what do you suppose I should do
Find one house and settle, you could even try to renovate the house you get to your taste
I'm so scared right now.
Please calm down. Just tell me what happened.
I've had a very bad relationship with my husband and was secretly having an affair before I could file divorce paperwork. He then attempted to kill me with a cast iron pan.
Wow, sounds like things have been rough lately. For now, it might be a good idea to stay away from him.
That's what I'm planning to do. I fear for my safety.
Know one thing. I'm always here when you need me or if you want someone to talk to.
Things have become very complicated between me and Sydney
Oh that is terrible new, what happened?
Sydney found out that I was having an affair and tried to kill me with a cast iron pan
That's awful, have you gone to the police?
I didn't think it was serious enough to get the police involved
This is definitely serious, I would go to them straight away
I really miss my daughter.
When was the last time you've seen her?
I gave her up for adoption 20 years ago.
You should try to get in contact with her.
Yes, today I decided to call her.
I hope she answers and that the two of you can get to know each other better.
I was so nervous when I dialled the phone.
What made you decide to finally call her?
Well it's been 20 years and I wanted to see how she turned out.
Did she want to talk to you?
Yes, we are actually going to meet in person soon.
That's great, I hope all goes well for you.
I had a weird conversation today
Who did you talk to?
Do you know Aubrey? Her
Oh yes, your neighbour that you told me about?
Yes! today she was explaining something very complex and weird, and all I could do was stare at her while she spoke.
That happens to me sometimes, I totally get it.
I was listening to Aubrey.
What did she have to say?
She was trying to explain her reasoning.
Did her argument make sense?
I was so fixed on her face that I missed her reasoning altogether.
You owe it to her to let her make her case.
My friend Aubrey came over yesterday to tell me why she was moving.
What was the reason she gave for her decision?
I forget the exact words she used, I was more focused on her facial expressions.
Did she seem sincere or like she was making excuses?
From my close examination of her while she spoke, she seemed totally sincere.
So I guess you believed her, right?
Be careful where you're walking, I've got mousetraps everywhere.
Is there an infestation?
I don't know, but I found mouse droppings in a few rooms of the house and didn't want to take any chances.
That's good thinking. Mice are pests.
Oh, I think my mousetrap just went off!
what?
There was a mouse making a nest in my kitchen, I found it's droppings, but I think I just trapped it
I'm surprised your cat didn't catch it.
He's way too fat to care about anything but his next set of treats.
You're not wrong, he looks pretty overweight.
I was wondering where the dropping came from.  One night I went downstairs for a snack and saw this mouse running around, so I bought a trap for it.
Did you trap it?
Yeah, I put some cheese on the trap.  A couple of days later, the mouse was dead in the trap.
How sad.
It's a mouse.  Not a friend who died.
It's still sad.
I can't wait for the food to get here, I'm so hungry!
Yeah, same, I'm glad they finally took our order.
Do you know where the restroom is?
I think it's back towards the kitchen.
Okay I have to use it real quick, I'll be right back.
Sounds good.
I was so excited for dinner.
Did you cook?
We decided to just order food in a restaurant.
That's a lot easier.
I was not feeling good so after ordering, I had to head to the bathroom.
I am sorry about that.
Let me take you out for coffee later. I made more money selling my collectibles than I was expecting.
Were they more valuable than you thought?
They appreciated in value a little bit since I bought them, so at the very least I made a profit when all is said and done.
A profit you're going to spend now taking me out for coffee, right?
That's right!
So I sold that Darth Vader figurine that I have two of.
Oh how much did you get?
I got $100! I put it up on eBay.
That's great! How much did you pay for it?
I think I got it for like $10.
Wow that was a nice investment. Congratulations!
I finally sold my Star Wars figurines.
You got rid of your figurines?
I sold them, for a nice profit too.
Ok, then maybe they were worth it.
I tried to break it down in simple terms that my friend would understand.  I was hurt by how she treated my little brother. It wasn't cool.
What did your friend do?
She made fun of him.
That's totally not cool.
He was acting up and wouldn't calm when I asked him nicely. Then she called him an idiot.
That's just hurtful.
I feel hungry.
Yea, its almost dinner time.
I haven't eaten in about 6 hours.
Me neither. Its time to eat.
Well my stomach is growling.
Mine too. Talk to you later.
I am feeling so down today like everything is crashing around me.
It is okay to feel this way, no one is supposed to be happy all the time.
I just think I could be doing so much more with my life.
You are an amazing and intelligent person, you will come out on the other side of this.
I hope you are right because right now I feel like hiding from everything,
Just know that I will always be here for you no matter what.
Looks like I am going to spend the rest of my life in prison.
This is all too much for me.  I still can't believe you killed Kai.
It was self defence.  Kai tried to kill me so I killed him first.
I don't think that you will spend the rest of your life in jail since it was self defence.  So don't worry.
But I took a man's life.  I feel so bad.  My life is over.
I will be here with you throughout the trial Kendall, I will be here for you.  I will be a character witness for you.
Sydney set off my alarm way too early this morning
Maybe she thought you could benefit from getting a little bit more time for your day.
I am well aware of how much time I need in a day to do my routine.
Maybe talk with Sydney and ask her to not set off your alarm so early again.
That's a good idea, I will bring it up with her next time I see her.
Hopefully it doesn't happen again after that.
I told Alex that I've found him attractive for a long time.
How did that go?
I was very nervous about it.  It took me a long time to build up the courage to tell him my feelings. He told me that he feels the same way.
You guys would make such a cute couple.
We have so much in common.  Alex has been my best friend for a long time.  I didn't want to tell him I liked him because I was afraid to lose our friendship.
You wouldn't lose it.  It'll just be better.
I hate being at military boarding school.
How did you wind up here?
I was getting in too much trouble.
That seems like a pretty silly reason to send you to military school.
Well, it wasn't my choice, my step-mom Kendall made the decision
That's harsh, hopefully it gets better for you.
Hi, how's your day been? I was in a quandary about what to have for dinner.
My day went well. So what were you thinking about having for dinner?
I couldn't decide between Chinese or Mexican food.
So have you reached a decision yet?
I decided to flip a coin. Heads was Chinese. Tails was Mexican. Chinese won. Yum!
I like Chinese food too. I'll be right over.
I'm not sure whether to cook dinner or order from a restaurant.
What ideas do you have in mind?
I'm thinking about pasta.
You can find a great pasta recipe or go to a restaurant that specializes in pasta.
I've made my decision. I'll order in pasta.
That sounds like a great idea.
I know that I deserve better.
You need to have a normal wedding.
I want a wedding in a mansion!
You cannot afford that!
I have worked so hard and I want my mansion!
You need a way to pay for something like that!
All the ideas were bad.
Are you sure?
I went through every single one of them and they all have issues.  I am just headstrong and hard to please.
That sounds about right.
We need to have another brainstorm meeting again.
Are you going to schedule that?
I rejected every idea they gave me but they kept insisting.
So are you going to change your mind and accept any of their ideas?
I told them they had to do better and the next time they present an idea, it better be the best one.
Wow! That's kind of strict. Did you give them any leads to go off of?
Nope. They need to learn how to do this job and do it right.
I am tired of driving.
How come you were driving?
I just had my new baby and I had to drove.
Were you alone?
Yes, so I drove the car to the front of the hospital.
Oh, you are so brave!
The other day I went to take the baby to see the doctor at the hospital.
How did that go?
Everything's fine, she is doing great.  But I didn't know where to park so I just parked right in the front of the hospital.
Did they tow your car?
No but a policeman was writing a ticket when we came back out.  But he was so nice, when he saw I had a little baby he tore up the ticket and told me to have a great day.
That was nice of him.  Sometimes cops can be nice to people.
I love politics.
You should run for office some day.
I want to some day soon.  I want to be class president.  To get on the ballot I need to get twenty-five signatures on a petition
I can do that for you.
Great. Then it's just a matter of putting up a few campaign signs and making a good speech at the sophomore class assembly.
Let's get on it.  I think you can win.
I am going to run for class president.  I love politics.
You could win it.  You are so popular.
It's not a popularity contest.
Mostly it is.  People vote for the people they like.
That's true.  I just want people to vote for me because of what I have to say.
You've got my vote.
I am running for class president!
I would vote for you. What is your platform going to be?
I don't know yet, will you help me?
Sure, let's meet at lunch and talk about it.
Lee thank you for helping me with my campaign posters, running for class president is so exciting!
No problem, it's going to be fun, what made you decide to run for president?
I have a weird love for politics so I figured this is the perfect platform for me to get into.
Oh I didn't realize, well don't forget me when you are running for president of the U.S. one day!
Right! You can help me do those posters.
Well let's get to it, these will be the best posters this school has ever seen!
I'd like to run as class president.
That is a hard job. Are you sure you can handle it?
I'm sure I can. It will be good practice for my future.
What would you like to be after we graduate?
I would like to go into politics. I find this very interesting.
I think you'll do good in politics. You are very smart and you have a great personality. Good luck on running for class president.
That Taxi cab smelled so bad.
It could not have been that bad.
It smelled like old socks.
Did you tell the driver?
The driver was where the smell came from!
Oh wow, that sounds awful.
I've been looking forward to this New Year's Eve party all year.
I am too. I haven't been downtown in a long time.
Me either. I wasn't sure whether I should drive or take a taxi.
How did you end up getting here?
I left my car keys at home and took a taxi.
That's probably for the best.
Macy and I went to a big New Year's Party at a bar downtown.  I decided to leave the car keys at home and take a taxi.
That's a wise decision.
We want to drink and have a celebration without worry about driving drunk.
Not everyone is that responsible.
Sad but true.
My friend lost her baby girl to drunk driving recently.
We went to a New Year's party downtown for my husband's job.
That sounds fancy. What all did you guys do?
It was fancy. But it was boring. His work friends always bore me so I just end up drinking a lot so we just took a taxi there and back and didn't even try and drive.
That was probably a smart idea.
I could have been the designated driver, but then my night would have been ruined. So I just left my keys at home.
Smart. Because then you couldn't even drive if you wanted to when your judgment was impaired.
I had dumped my pasta all over the table but I was too lazy to clean it up.  Kendall told my mom about it.
Did you clean it up eventually?
My mom told me I had to otherwise she won't give me money for this weekend.
That's good that you cleaned up your own mess.
I know I should.  I was just being a brat.  I should always clean up after myself.
Your mom taught you well.
The sauce from these meatballs always ruins my shirt
Don't be a wimp dude it's just pasta sauce
Yeah well this is my lucky shirt. I only have one of these
Buy a new one if that one gets ruined
You don't understand. I have scored 100 on every chemistry test by wearing this shirt. I cannot afford to have it ruined
Well okay. You wouldn't want to ruin that shirt then. That's some great luck
I was making meatballs the other day.
How did they turn out?
Pretty well. I was wearing an old sweater while making them.
Yeah, why an old sweater?
I thought it would be messy. But the sleeves of an old sweater won't stay up unless you roll them up.
Yeah, that will do the trick.
Riley is having a tough time getting over her break-up
Oh I am so sorry to hear that Riley, I hope you're okay.
You just need some time to get over it.
I am sure being held in Remy's arms will help too.
I hope you're doing okay Riley.
I am so sorry to hear about your break-up
Do you know what caused them to break up?
No, what happened?
Riley said that she was cheated on.
That's awful news!
I had to try and get her attention.
How did you do it?
I did it while I was reading a book.
Did it work like you planned?
I figured that it would turn out a certain way in the end.
I'm glad it worked out for you.
I am totally obsessed with this book.
Oh yeah, I have read that before.
Isn't it amazing?
Yeah, and the cliff hangers are insane.
I already kind of know what is going to happen at the end.
Oh, so you read spoilers?
I love the book I'm reading, it's got my attention!
Can you recommend the book for me?
Sure! Later.
Thanks, I will wait.
Reading the book, I knew what might happen in the end
I hope your guess will be right.
Ok I just need to check your heabrtbeat real quick and were done
How am I looking?
Like you just got out of surgery! But your heartbeat looks good
Thanks that's good to hear
Just get some rest and you'll be out in no time
Don't worry feel like I can sleep for a week
You shouldn't wait for me I have many chores to do.
Really, what else do you have to do?
Well the laundry and then go to the pharmacy.
Huh, I guess that will take a while.
Yeah, I need to tell Tracy to go ahead and let the others know I will be late.
I am happy to wait for you while Tracy goes ahead.
Well I have a lot to do today.
Like what?
I have to do laundry and then take a trip to the pharmacy.
Hmm that is a lot, can anyone help you?
I could ask Tracy to go for me instead.
That's a good plan.
I sold my car at such a deep discount so I could pay my bills.
Did you get enough for it to pay off your other bills?
Yes, just barely.
That's good, but how are you going to get to work now?
I'm only a few minute walk from a bus stop, so I'll do that until I can save enough for another car.
You could also think about getting a bike.
I'm selling all these cars at lower prices.
Are you in need of money that badly?
Yes, I need cash flow as soon as possible to pay bills.
At least you have a way of coming up with the money.
I need to find a better way to pay my bills next month.
Definitely, but for now just focus on this month.
I am so short of money nowadays.
I wish I could be of help but I am broke too.
Don't worry about it. I just sold my cars and I should be able to pay my bills.
That was a wise decision.
I feel better now that I have paid my necessary bills.
I wish you luck, my friend.
Kai and I went to the stables to the horses.
Was the instructor there?
No, but his wife was so she let us go see them. I was so excited.
How was your horse?
She was great! She was all groomed and looked happy to see me.
That's awesome, I should come next time.
I'm so excited to see my horse!
Me too man! how long has it been since you've seen her
It's been at least 6 months. I hope she'll remember me
I'm sure she will horses are loyal
I can't wait to ride her either, I've really missed it
I know the feeling!
I don't have time to talk to my mother right now
Did your work ever call you about your promotion?
No, I'm waiting on them to call me so I cant be on the phone with my mom.
I'm sure she will understand why you couldn't talk to her at the moment
I can't make our lunch this weekend, sorry!
No problem at all, what happened?
One of my good friends needs help moving
Oh yeah, it was Tiffany that was moving near you, right?
Yeah, I promised to help her move and forgot to tell you
It's all good, we will find another time
I heard you were moving and I am here to lend a hand
Oh hi Robin! I haven't seen you in years. It's great that you've come to help Tiffany move too!
Has it been that long?
I think so!
Well what do you two need help with
You can start with those boxes over there
I was really worried about this lump I found, but seeing the doctor has calmed me down.
I am glad it came back all clear.
I know, I've never felt a lump before so when I noticed it I got it checked straight away.
Its good to keep up the routine checks like that
Yeah definitely.
Better safe than sorry!
My doctor checked out my lump and had surgery.  I feel all better now.
That's good that you had it removed.
It wasn't cancerous, but I wanted it removed, just to be safe.
You have to watch out for lumps.
Cancer runs in my family so I am extra careful.
I have cancer in my family too.
After finding the lump I wasn't sure whether I would be okay.
Lumps can be really dangerous so it's good that you noticed it.
I booked an appointment with the doctor as soon as I found it.
Have you had it checked out already?
Yes, the doctor gave me the all clear, I am feeling much better about it now.
That's great to hear!
My dream finally came through.
What was that?
My goal was to meet a famous person. Today it happened in the mall.
That's amazing!
Today has been the best day ever!
I can't believe you met a famous person!
I never thought I would meet a real famous person. I'm shaking with excitement
He was so cool, and down to earth.
Who would have thought he would have been here at the mall.
Wait until you tell the rest of the boys, they will be so excited.
I am taking my dog somewhere really cool today
Where are you guys going?
I signed him up to come to the car show with me. I love him so much I want to take him everywhere
He will surely enjoy that!
Yeah we have become inseparable these days
I love my dog too, we are always together.
I love my hair do so much that I scheduled for another cut before the show.
You have a great stylist.
She always does such a fantastic job.
How did you find her?
I've been going to her for years.
She knows what looks good on you.
I did something wrong.
What was that?
I wanted my team to win so I taught them how to cheat.
That was so wrong.
Getting better with practice was taking too long!
Practice takes time you know.
I fear that I have given bad advice to the team.
Oh, what did you do?
I told them to cheat rather than practice.
That is terrible ce.
Yeah I do regret it.
I would definitely own up to your mistake.
If you think I look bad, you should see Austin. We got into a big fight.
Is he the one who bruised your throat?
Yeah, but I bruised him all over. It was not pretty. I hurt him real bad.
You guys can't see each other anymore. You're in a toxic relationship.
Can you believe Austin hit me in the throat?
The nerve of him.
I hurt him much worse.
Wow this is a terrible situation
Austin hit me again last night.
When are you going to leave Austin?
He hit me in the throat. That's ok , I hurt him much worse.
If you don't leave him, one of you is going wind up seriously hurt.
I probably should, you're right.
Austin hit me in the throat.
Did you hit him back?
Yeah, I hurt him much worse.
Is he in a lot of pain?
Probably, I walked away from him.
That wasn't a great thing to do Tracy.
Ugh, I left my phone at home again.
Oh no, I am sorry to hear that.
Could you tell me what time it is please?
I believe it is 1 o'clock.
Thank you!
I almost came home late last night.
Don't you have an alarm on your phone so you remember when to be home.
I do, but I had left my phone at home, and realized it almost to late.
How did you find out the correct time?
I asked someone what time it was and luckily it was close to the time I had to be home.
Good thing you asked someone who had the time!
Excuse me, could I trouble you for the time?
Sure let me just check my phone.
Thank you so much!
It's currently one p. m. Do you not have your phone?
Sadly not, I left it at home.
I hate it when that happens.
I saved Austin's life a long time ago.
What happened?
Austin and I were comrades in the army.
Was there a fight?
We were in a battle together.
That must have been terrifying!
Well that was better than expected
See I told you it would be good
The trailer looked so dumb though
It's supposed to, its one of those dumb comedies
I just thought it was going to be actually stupid
Next time you can try to change my mind about a movie
The movie was interesting.
Yeah, I loved it also.
I thought it looked pretty dumb from the previews.
Yeah, I saw it also.
But, the movie is seriously dope.
That's true, previews don't reflect the finished film most times.
The movie was much better than I was expecting!
You said it looked pretty dumb
I wish I could take back those words
I told you not to judge the trailers
I know and I did!
Learn something from this
My client Lee was dispelled from school for wearing the wrong thing.
What did your client wear?
He wore a badge from one of the organization he supports and that was seen to be controversial.
That's his right, isn't it?
That's what I am going to argue in court.  I am helping him fight for his rights to wear whatever he wants.
You fight the good fight.
That school tried to tell Lee he could not wear his braids.
How can they do that, it's part of his culture.
That is why I filed a lawsuit, speaking to the school did nothing.
By taking it to court, you may be helping other kids as well.
Lee should be free to wear what he likes now I have been to court.
Wow. Thanks for doing that for him Addison. How did you manage it?
I convinced the judge that fashion is a form of expression that is protected by the first amendment.
That's a very clever argument.
I am just very happy that Lee can express himself.
I am sure he will be too!
I'm going take the business job.
That's great. Any reason?
It's going to get me a better home loan.
Are you going to buy a house?
Yes I am.
That's amazing news!
I start my new job tomorrow, at that new business.
Wow, congratulations. I didn't know you were looking for job.
Yes, it's time to go back to work. Plus, we're going to take out a home loan and it helps if I'm working, too.
I see, it'll definitely help with the loan. What are you planning to do with it?
No, we want to consolidate our bills into one payment. The interest will be much less, too.
Good idea. Hope it works out for you with the loan. Let me know how it goes.
So I have decided not to go back to school for now and to take this business job.
What were the deciding factors for you?
Well I really would like to get a better home loan so I will need a better work history on file
Is your home loan not satisfactory right now
It is a little high and can't be modified, I just need a good job with a good income
Sounds like it was a good decision for you then, good luck with the loan!
I decided to take a business job recently.
Why so?
I needed it to get a better home loan.
Glad to hear that.
Hopefully this job works out.
Wishing you the best.
Sasha has been training extra hard for the competition.
She is has been going to the gym everyday after work.
I know that she is going to win the competition, with all that extra time she is putting in.
The extra practice will definitely pay off.
I've been watching Sasha and I think that she is going to do great.
Really, you think?
Yeah, she has practiced so much that she has got it down to a science.
Do you think she has a chance of winning the competition?
She is definitely going to win the competition.
I hope so too.
I stayed out all night partying last night.
I thought you had to go to work this morning.
I did.
Then why did you stay out last night.
I'm tired of living a safe life.
You should still be cautious about what you are doing.
My family tells me when I was growing up that I am the responsible one out of all of my siblings.
How many siblings do you have?
I came from a decent size family.  There's six of us plus our parents.  That's a family of eight.
That's pretty big.  I only have one sister.
I am tired of being so responsible, so I am not going to college after high school.  I just want to travel the world for a year with the money I've saved for college.
You want to see the world.  Nothing wrong with that.
I am never going to get out of this debt.t
You can stay with me, while you sell your house.
I thought I would win the poker hand, double or nothing and I lost!
So you lost it, things can be lost. You need to quit gambling your money away.
I played a game with a friend earlier
That's cool what'd you play?
Just something so we could finally settle our feud
How did it go?
Fine I guess, but I had to clearly state all the rules of the game for them to understand it.
Maybe it was their first time playing
We need to settle all these nasty tensions that we have between us.
You're so right.  We need to play a game to settle this
Yeah there are a lot of rules in the game that I need to go over with you
That's feasible.  I am excited to play
Once we understand the rules we can finally settle this fued.
I am ready
So here are rules of our contest.
Why do you get to make the rules?
I think you will find them fair and equal.
Okay, let's hear them.
Number one, there is no cheating. Number two, you cannot move backwards. Number three, the game will last exactly three rounds.
Fair enough. Let's settle this thing once and for all!
I'm really sorry I broke your leg during martial arts training.
It's okay. The doctor gave me a lot of medication after the surgery.
Does it still hurt.
Yeah, there is still a lot of deep and physical pain, but it feels a lot better than it did before.
I hope you get better soon.
Me too. I can't wait to get back to training.
I accidentally broke someone's leg by accident.
What happened?
I accidentally tripped them.
How are they feeling?
They're in a lot of physical pain, like a lot.
You should make sure you tell them it was an accident.
I didn't mean to break your leg.
I know you didn't mean to. It was accident.
Are you in a lot of pain?
When the painkillers wear off I have a lot of physical pain.
We need to quit playing so rough.
Definitely need to be more careful in the future.
Me and my friend were wrestling around and he got hurt.
Was he okay?
I accidentally broke his leg and he was in a lot of pain.
Oh no, did he go to the hospital?
He did, an ambulance had to come to collect him.
I am really sorry to hear that, I hope he feels better soon.
I hope I look great with this new dress for the party.
Robin, why don't you bring someone with you to the party.
I want to go alone.
But its a couples party! You're supposed to bring a date.
I am my own date!
You are being especially hard headed today.
I'm going to that party alone tonight.
You don't know anyone there, I don't trust those people.
I don't care I just want to party.
You shouldn't go alone, what if something happens?
I will be fine, I'm an adult.
I still don't think it's a good idea.
Thanks for this cake Mark, but do you have any ice cream instead of sprinkles?
Oh good idea Austin, I could go for some ice cream too.
I am sure it would make this cake taste even better.
I usually like sprinkles but in this case I think ice cream would be amazing.
I hope Mark has some.
Me too.
I'm just not much a cake person. I prefer ice cream.
Well what kind of ice cream did they have.
They had vanilla ice cream to go with the chocolate cake.
Were Mark's feelings hurt that you didn't want the cake?
Nope. He knows besides liking ice cream more that I'm watching my weight.
Good. I hate it when people get mad when you reject their offerings.
I was so hungry for ice cream earlier but Mark only had chocolate cake with sprinkles.
Did you check in the freezer, I thought we had some.
I asked him to check but he said there wasn't any left.
Someone must've eaten it then, did you have the cake anyway?
No, I was really craving ice cream.
I get like that sometimes too.
I had to help Carson with understanding some sentences this morning.
Spanish can be very hard to learn.
It's definitely not an easy language master.
How did you become so good at it?
Someone that worked with my grandma spoke it and so I was around it a lot.
That makes sense, lucky you.
Carson was really struggling with understanding some of the sentences from the Spanish homework today.
Did you manage to help him with it?
I just gave him an example to help him understand it better.
It must help that you are already fluent in Spanish.
It definitely does, but in future Carson should ask the teacher for help.
If he asks you again just politely tell him to ask the teacher.
Here you go! Happy Birthday!
Thank you Jesse! You didn't have to! What is it?
Well, open it and you will find out!
A new cook book! My favourite! How did you know?
You love cooking, and I wanted to make sure I picked out the best book for you!
Well, you were spot on! Thank you so much!
Here, this book is amazing. It will change your life.
Oh, a self-help book? I don't read those. They're all the same.
I'm telling you, this one is different. This book is truly capable of making a whole new person out of you.
I guess it's worth a try.
I am really trying to help Aubrey prepare for college.
What does she need to do before she leaves?
She hasn't even packed her car yet, I am going to do it for her so it's one less thing to worry about.
I am sure she will appreciate that a lot.
I hope so, she really needs to get ready if she wants to get there on time.
I am sure she is just getting flustered from everything that needs to be done.
I can't believe Aubrey is leaving for college today, do you know if she needs any more help?
She won't be too far away. Could you help me load her car, she has some bags that are ready to be packed?
Of course, where are the bags?
In the hallway, she has a lot of stuff so we are going to need to be organised.
Wow she does have a lot, is all of this going to fit in her room?
I'm sure it will be fine!
I'm going to help Aubrey get ready to leave for college.  She's running late and still hasn't even packed her stuff in the car.
Okay.  I can help too, I don't have anything else to do today.
I'm going to grab the two suitcases.  Can you get the boxes?
Sure, no problem.  I'll also grab this guitar case.
The trunk of her car might not be big enough for everything she is bringing to college with her!
Let's just see what we can fit and go from there.
This new breakthrough has proven to be effective.
Why do you say that?
Because the cancer rates are down and continue to go down.
That sure is impressive, you should continue with the hard work.
We will, this new breakthrough is just the start.
Hopefully the cancer rates can go down to zero.
This is amazing, our treatment is going to do wonders
The results are great!
I predict that cancer rates will continue to go down at a steady pace
That's amazing, how did you come up with this new breakthrough treatment?
It wasn't just me, it was a lot of hard work by a lot of people
You do have a great team
We believe we have another breakthrough in the new therapies for cancer patients.
Wow that is amazing news!
I really believe it will lower cancer rates.
You're an amazing researcher.
I have a good team of scientists.
I can't wait to hear if the trials work.
Wow, I feel so much better after these withdrawal symptoms passed.
You look great and I bet you feel much healthier.
I do. I have more energy and I am never out of breathe.
And you smell so much better!
True. I hate that smell on my clothes and furniture.
We should celebrate!
Quitting smoking and drinking was definitely the hardest thing I've ever done.
It was for the best, though. I'm glad you took charge of your health.
Yeah, but I wasn't too happy at the start.
It was a rough few weeks, that's true.
But now that some time has passed and I'm feeling better, I am so glad I quit.
You're going to be so much healthier now. I'm proud of you!
Smoking made me so unhappy.
I'm glad that you stopped doing it then.
I don't even have an urge to do it anymore.
That's a sign that you're doing well.
I could not lie to Sydney last night.
Why would you?
He looked me straight in the eye and asked me several questions.
He nust have been scary.
Not really, but I could not lie.
The truth will always prevail anyway.
I went to grab my food from the fridge earlier and it was gone!
That's awful I wonder who took it.
Well, I figured out who took it.
Who?
It was Sydney, he came up to me, looked me in the eye and told me.
I hope he replaces your food tomorrow.
I decided I would cook Sydney and I a really nice meal last weekend.
How did that go?
I burned some of it and over seasoned other parts.
What did Sydney say?
She told me the truth.
At least she was honest with you!
I made Sydney some food the other day for work.
Oh yeah, did he say thanks?
Well he ate the whole thing.
Did he enjoy it?
When he got back from work, he looked me in the eye and told me he loved it!
That's so great!
Okay everyone calm down!
Do you have any advice on how to find our runaway dog?
If you just keep calm you'll find your pet a lot sooner.
Should we put out fliers? Our split into teams?
Yes! Do both of those things. Also call in some professionals and contact local law enforcement.
Thanks for the help!
You guys might have to skip me.
What's the matter Carson?
I think I need to go to the bathroom.
Okay, Taylor can take your turn.
Okay. I will be back in 5 minutes.
See you in a few minutes.
Will you go and tell them I'm just in the bathroom?
They know. They're going to have someone take your turn.
Is that allowed?
Sure, why not? I think Taylor is going to go for you.
Oh, good. Then I can just switch with him.
Exactly. The turn order really makes no difference.
Do you think I'm hard headed?
Who said you're hard headed?
Skylar did today, she tilted my head back to whisper a secret.
I don't think Skylar knows what hard headed means.
What does it mean?
It means stubborn, but you're not stubborn.
Did you hear what Skylar said? I couldn't hear it.
I think she said that Jessica and Tyler are officially dating now.
She tilted my head back and whispered it to me but I still couldn't make it out.
I don't know why she is being so secretive about it, everybody else already knows.
I think Skylar thinks I am hard headed so maybe she wasn't sure how best to approach me about it.
That makes sense.
Skylar just tilted my head back and whispered something to me.
That's strange, what did she say?
I don't know, I couldn't hear her very well
I wonder what she was trying to tell you.
It must've been something secret if she didn't want anyone else to hear.
You will have to ask her to repeat what she said.
Remy is only 14 and he has no business hiding alcohol under his bed!
I agree, I would not be happy about this, where is he getting it from anyway?
That is one of many questions I have, I just haven't decided how to confront him about it yet
Well you should be careful you don't want to push him away.
It's not something he should be doing at his age!
I agree, I'm here for you if you need support
I had to ground Remy today.
What did he do now?
I found a bottle of alcohol under his bed.
Wow, I can't believe he's already drinking.
Me too. He's only 14 years old.
It's better he learns that alcohol will get him trouble at an early age.
Cameron keeps telling me to call and make an appointment with the doctor.
What for, do you still have that cold?
Unfortunately, yes. It's been two weeks.
Remy. That's not good. I agree with Cameron, you should call the doctor.
You're right, I should. I will call later today and make an appointment.
Good. I hope you feel better.
I wish this cold would go away.
It seems like you've been sick for a long time.
Yeah, its been two weeks.
You'd better call the doctor and make an appointment, that's too long of a time to have a cold.
You're right, Cameron already told me too, I should've listened when he said.
Hopefully they can help you.
I took Cameron's measurements so that I can make a wedding dress for Cameron.
She's so lucky.  You are one of the best designers.
She's my childhood friend. It's an honour for me to do this for her.
It's a big day and she'll cherish it forever.
She's a beautiful bride.  She'll look magnificent on her wedding day.
She really is a natural beauty.
Did you hear Cameron is getting married soon?
Yes, I did, it's so exciting.
I want to make a wedding dress for Cameron, it's going to look amazing.
That would be awesome.
I just need to take her measurements and I can get started.
You should ask her, the sooner you have them the sooner you can start.
I just got home from Cameron's house. I'm making her wedding dress!
Wow, she must trust your skill a lot.
I think so. I had to take her measurements today so I can get started.
I imagine it takes a long time to make a wedding dress.
It does. There are some very intricate spots on it. She's going to love it!
I had a huge fight the day before.  I just want to make peace.
Who did you fight with?
My friend's brother we had a big disagreement about who won a game.
Wow, seems like a lot of drama over a game, it's good that you want to get along now though.
I just hope he isn't still angry about it so we can move on.
I hope so too.
My dad and I had a big fight yesterday.
Are you still angry at him?
No, I actually made peace with him already.
Good to hear that
I love my dad and I would do anything to get along with him.
You are a good son.
I recently got some money from Quinn for safekeeping.
I hope you have hidden it somewhere secure.
I have put it all in my safe, nobody will be able to get it in there.
That's a smart decision.
I thought so too
Quinn gave me some money to put in my safe.
how much money was it?
It had to be at least twenty thousand dollars.
Where did Quinn get all that money from?
I don't know but it made me kind of nervous.
I bet it did, I've never seen twenty thousand at one time before.
You know how I've been saying I want to plant some tomatoes?
Yes I remember.
I decided to start a tomato garden in my backyard.
Wow, that's great! Any other fruits or vegetables?
I want to start off small and see how the tomatoes turn out first.
Good idea. Let me know how they turn out.
I'm going to do some building.
What you going to build?
I loved tomatoes and I want my own. So I'm going to build a garden.
That's cool.
I have just the right space in my backyard for it.
Good luck.
I can't wait until my tomato plant grow
How long does it usually take to grow
At most a month or two
You will have a lot of tomatoes for yourself
I always wanted to have my own tomatoes in my own backyard
I made Skylar take the oath to the office
So she's in politics now? That's great news
I put her hands on the book and everything along with it, she's in!
She worked hard, she deserves it
I agree totally
I wish her the best
Learning how to play the piano is so frustrating.
Just keep practicing. You'll get better over time.
I don't know. It's just so hard.
Don't give up. You've already done so much.
I used to really enjoy playing the jazz piano.
Do you not anymore?
I am just finding it too hard.
If you keep practising I am sure you will get back into it.
I should really practice a lot more.
Let me know how you get on.
I was having a lot of fun there, but got lazy and agitated.
I loved your playing, will you play again?
Yes I will.
I can't wait to hear it.
I'll be more organized and less sloppy this time around.
It sounds good to me!
I'm beat right now.
What are you beat from?
I was racing my friend Riley and just couldn't catch up.
What a bummer.  Is she really athletic?
Yes, I couldn't get past her and lost the race.
Too bad, but maybe next time.
I lost a race to Riley today
What happened? You're pretty fast.
We were racing down city streets. And I couldn't get around him because people were walking in the other lane.
Where you in the street, or on the sidewalk?
On the sidewalk. And I was right behind him.
Yeah pedestrian traffic is pretty heavy in your neighbourhood.
Dan was saying something to me but the train door closed. Even though it was glass I couldn't hear what he was saying.
Did you call and find out what he was saying?
I did not. When I called him his phone rang in my purse.
Maybe he was trying to tell you that you had his phone.
These phones all look the same to me. I must have grabbed his thinking it was mine.
Better get a case so you can tell them apart.
I can't hear anything, can you speak louder.
I am speaking as loud as I can.
Okay, come over to my side then.
Okay one second, let me pick up my stuff first.
Thanks, okay this is better.
I am glad you can hear me now.
I can't hear you!
What? I don't understand.
You're on the other side of the glass door. I can't hear you when you talk!
I can't hear you either.
This is so frustrating, what can we do to hear each other better?
Maybe we should open the door.
I was trying to have a conversation today but couldn't hear anything.
How come you couldn't hear?
I was on the other side of a glass door
Could you not just open the door?
No. I tried but it was locked .
That is frustrating.
Robin looked so bored today at the house.
There isn't much to do.
I didn't want her to feel like she was wasting her time so I took her out.
That's nice, where did you go?
We just went to the store to get some food.
That's better than being bored at home.
My roommate Robin was bored, so I took her to the store to do some retail therapy. That was about it for this weekend!
That's good, sounds like a good weekend! Did you buy things that you wanted or needed?
It was mostly Robin that did the shopping. I get paid bi-weekly so I am broke until next weekend. How was your weekend?
Not bad, rather uneventful. Did some yard work and watched Netflix!
Nice!
Robin and I had been sitting in the house for days, we needed to get out.
Oh where did you end up going?
I went to the store and took Robin with me.
That's nice, what did you buy?
I got some eggs and the ingredients to make a chocolate cake.
Oh can I have some cake when it is done?
I could have been a real contender if I wasn't always dealing with Skylar.
What's happening with you and Skylar?
She is just always holding me back.
I wonder if she is jealous of you.
I think I need to choose between Skylar and my success.
That's not an easy decision to make, make sure you take time to consider everything.
Skylar doesn't always support me. I feel like she's jealous of me.
She might be.  Did you talk to her about that?
Not yet.  She just keeps me from becoming the best that I can be.  Sometimes I just want some encouragement.
Friends should encourage and support each other.
I just don't think she has my best interest in mind sometimes.
Maybe you should reconsider being friends with her.
I've been struggling with work lately. My co-workers think I'm doing a poor job.
What are you going to do to fix things?
I've already started by improving the morale in the patients. A co-worker even complimented me about it today!
Good job! There's always a solution, it's just a matter of figuring out what the solution is.
Other nurses have doubted my work but I showed them I am a hard worker
No one works as hard as you around here and you have such a great personality
I try to have new jokes everyday to improve patient's moods
I think you have a new joke every time I see you
I feel so lucky to just be alive. You have no idea what I just went through at work tonight.
What happened?
The store got robbed!
Was it just you in the store at the time?
I was totally alone, it was so scary.
I'm so sorry to hear that that happened to you, I hope you're okay now!
I was robbed on the way back from the restaurant.
When did this happen?
Last night after I had dinner with my friends.  They offered to take me home but I wanted to walk.
It's not like you live in a scary neighbourhood.
I have always felt safe here.  A teenager pulled a knife out and demanded that I give him my purse.
That's horrible, I hope you're okay.
Skylar is mad at me.  I took her money because I was broke.
You mean you stole her money.
I was desperate, I am broke.
You know what you did was wrong.  You need to give her back the money.
It's gone. I spent it all already.
You need to apologise and own up.
My colleagues think I am underdog, but I always come through and meet the needs of the clients.
As long as the clients are happy, you are good.
They can be difficult to please sometimes, but most clients are easy to deal with.
That's how it goes.  It's like that at my work too.
I heard that you got promoted. Congrats.
Thanks. I've worked hard at this job.
Check it out.
What?
All my colleagues think I'm an underdog, but my clients are all satisfied.
Keep up the hard work and I am sure they will start recognising your skills.
I found that bag of money that Joe was looking for.
Did you give it back to him?
No, it has a thousand dollars in it. I went and bought some new sunglasses.
He should have paid attention to where he put it and you would not have found it.
I just stole a big bag of money from Joe.
Wow, how much money?
I don't know, but I can pay rent this month!
Does Joe know about this?
No, he's still looking for it!
If you don't give me some, I'm telling!
I really love the present Skylar gave me.
It's great that you like it. Skylar really must love you!
I love her too!
I'm really happy you two have found each other.
May this be beginning of a great relationship!
I am sure it will be!
I appreciate Skylar so much for getting me this beautiful bracelet
She really cares for you
I should do something nice for her in return>
Theirs a new restaurant on the other side of town, you could book a table for the two of you.
That's a great idea!
I'm walking around the school today trying to enlist students to vote for me for the student council.
Do you think you have a chance? The people you're running against are pretty popular.
I think of it as a grass roots campaign. I've got a lot of buzz around campus and I'm doing more legwork than my competitors.
Either way, I'll be sure to vote for you!
I had to call a student into my office today.
How come?
He was cheating on an exam.
What did you do?
I gave him a strong lecture, called his parents, and suspended him for three days.
You're tough.
Sometimes I hate my job. I had to suspend a student today for cheating on a test.
That's too bad. What did the kid say about it.
He never said a word. I called him into my office and gave him a chance to defend himself, but he said nothing.
He probably figured it wouldn't matter. He was caught and he was going to get punished for it.
But, it does matter. Cheating is always wrong but sometimes there are extenuating circumstances that move kids to do it.
I had to call a student into my office.
Why? Was there a problem?
Yes. The student cheated on an exam.
Are you sure the student really cheated?
Yes. The teacher caught the student cheating.
Wow! That's too bad. I don't know why students think they need to cheat.
I am almost glad I didn't win that eating competition.
I thought chicken wings were your favourite?
That's true but the person who won ate so many that he had to go to the hospital!
That's awful, do you know if he is okay?
I think so, he is coming back tomorrow to collect his prize.
Good thing you didn't eat that many.
My glasses are so dirty.
You should clean them.
I need to take them off.
I have sanitizing wipes. You can use these.
Thanks. Can I have one to clean my glasses?
Sure here you go.
Hold up a second, I can't see anything.
Well look at your glasses.
Exactly, I really want to clean them but I don't have a cloth.
Here, use this to clean them.
Thanks, I'll just take them off and clean them real quick.
No rush, take your time.
I can hardly see.
Well, your glasses are filthy.
I'm taking them off and cleaning them.
So, did that help?
I can see!
That was all it took.
I need to clean my glasses.
What's going on with them?
They are so foggy right now.
Get a cloth to wipe them clean.
Do you have one?
Sure take this one.
I've been practicing everyday with Skylar to try to make the team.
I bet you'll make it. You have really improved.
I don't know about that. There are some awesome players on the team and I may not be up to snuff.
Just keep at it. Skylar is a great coach and she's been on the team since last year.
She's given me a lot of pointers, but I'm not as quick as she is.
That's frustrating, but you have a lot of other attributes that would make you an essential team member.
I've decided to give Bailey another chance on that test.
What, Bailey? I thought you said she was a lost cause.
Yes. But it's the lost causes that are worth fighting for, isn't it?
That's true Jan.
Bailey is such a brilliant student but she failed her test.
I think she got distracted before the test!
I guess so, but I am giving her another chance.
She should pass this time around.
I believe so.
Good
I reviewed Bailey's test, and she has many incorrect answers.
Apparently she studied very hard, but forgot some of the answers.
Do you think she memorized the important details?
She said she read the information.
I will allow Bailey to take the test again tomorrow, as long as she memorizes the details.
I'm sure she will work very hard to remember the details.
I'm getting revenge on Riley for betraying me.
Don't plot anything too stupid or dangerous.
I'm just filling Riley's tank with pure oxygen instead of the normal nonlethal mixture I typically use.
Whoa, that's taking the revenge plan a step too far.
It was a joke, I would never do that.
Not funny, I've almost reported your actions to the police.
I just found out that Riley betrayed me.
What are you going to do to her?
I will fill her tank with pure oxygen instead of the usual safe formulation.
Won't that kill her?
Nah, I just want to scare her.
Maybe you should check first how dangerous your plan actually is.
I'm home.
Did you get back from the police office?
Yeah, I was there for awhile.
So what happened exactly?
Some guys led me and my co-worker into the woods, robbed us, and then tried to get us to dig our own graves.
That is so scary! I'm glad you're safe now.
How do I even get myself into these positions?
you should have never gambled all that money away
I thought I could pay it back
yeah, and then the thugs came for the money, robbed you, and then tried to get you and your colleague to dig your own graves.
I guess I made a bad mistake
I was forced to dig my own grave by the mob thugs.  They led my friend and me into the woods.
They were going to kill you in the woods and bury you guys there.
I think that was the plan.  We fought our way out.
That's brave.
We hit them over the head with the shovels and ran as fast as we could.
There's no way they could have out run you guys.
Last night was the most scared I've ever been in my whole life!
I know! I can't believe you escaped those mobsters.
As we were digging our graves I just kept thinking that I don't want to be buried behind this crappy warehouse.
It was really smart of you to tell them you found a suitcase in the hole.
Yeah, I still remember the look on their faces when we pushed them in! That was priceless!
Hopefully we can get out of town before they found you out.
Do you think this book is as interesting as I do?
I definitely like it and I actually bought the audio book to listen to as well as the hard copy.
I want people to read it because I think it pertains to all of the craziness going on in the world today.
Yeah even though it is fiction I think it has a lot of themes relevant to today's world.
I posted my thoughts about it on social media and some other people are interested in reading it as well.
It is a really good book and I would recommend it to anyone who asks.
This book I recently read is very interesting.
Really? Which book is it?
Game of Thrones.
Why is it interesting?
Great storylines, nicely written and character development is amazing.
I will definitely check it out when I get the chance.
You should really read this book its amazing.
The cover looks nice, what is it about.
I can't spoil the book, but I'm telling you, you should read it.
You're getting me interested.
Trust me you won't regret.
Alright you convinced me, I will read it.
Have you read the new book entitled “Lovely”?
No. But I plan to do so.
I did a detailed review so others will be encouraged to buy it.
It must be good then for you to entice others to read it.
It was well written and the plot was unique.
I can’t wait to get hold of one.
I was at the bus stop when I realized that I didn't have my house key.
Did you leave it in the house?
No, because I locked the door. I tried to look for them, but I had to rush to a job interview.
Did you find them?
No I ended up getting a call from my local coffee shop, a customer saw them on the table.
Well that's good at least!
Okay, I’m ready to go. I can’t believe how nervous I am.
It’s an important job interview! It’s normal to be nervous. I’m sure you’re going to do great.
I hope so. Do you have the keys?
I don’t, you took the car last.
I...don’t know where they are. This couldn’t be a worse time to lose the keys!
Oh no! Okay, let’s tear this place apart and find them quick!
Hey, I was wondering if you've seen my car keys.
Your keys? No, I sure haven't. You can't find them?
I've been looking all day. I was almost late to my job interview.
Oh no, how stressful! What did you do?
Called a cab. I didn't have any other option. Now I just need to find those keys.
I'll help you look. Do you have any idea where they could have gone?
I lost the keys and I need to get to that interview right now.
Have you looked in all obvious places ?
Yeah, I can't find them anywhere.
Well, you better just get an uber. I can come over your house as soon as I can if you are afraid to leave the door unlocked.
Thanks a lot.
What is that?
What is what?
You see that mark on Taylor's face?
Is that why you turned the pictures upside down?
I've been so mad at the pep squad at school I finally blew up at them.
Oh no.  How did they react.
I think they were just shocked.  I usually go along with anything but over the last couple of months they've disregarded every idea I've had.
Did they agree to listen to you moving forward?
They said they would, but we'll see.  I might just find another group to join.
If felt great to just express my anger to everybody.
I was surprised you were so angry.
I couldn't help it. I've been angry for a while and finally just had enough.
It's healthy to express yourself, but I think it's better if you do it more often than holding it in.
I think you're right. I'll just be more angry from now on.
That's not really what I meant.
I'm really tired of doing all the work for the project while you guys just joke around.
I'm sorry you feel that way, Bailey. We were just letting off some steam.
I'm just sick of writing everything and you guys don't seem to care.
How about if I take over the writing for a while?
That would make me feel better, especially if we divide up the other tasks.
Okay. Let's divide up the project so we all have responsibility.
I have been feeling pretty frustrated lately and I let my anger out on everyone
you should have said something so your friends could calm you down
I feel sorry now sorry, I guess I have my father's temper and have a hard time controlling it
you might have to go to anger management classes if you keep it up
Oh cool, there are so many people going to this party
yeah, it is going to be nice
I can't wait to see Katie and her husband
yeah, I hear they recently got engaged and married too
right, I am happy to see them
same as me !
I didn't planned to go to the party.
Yeah, you told me, but I later saw you. How come?
Katie was going to the party with her husband, so I followed them.
Oh, hope it was fun?
Not really.
You should have stayed.
It was a lot of fun going to go the party, Katie was also there with her husband
Yeah, I know you two have wanted to see each other at the party
Yeah, ever since we both have kids we've had less time for it
I think that's normal. I'm glad you were able to go to the party!
It ended up being a lot of fun too! We'll definitely try to do it more often
I think that sounds like a really great idea!
I bought so much stuff from Walmart yesterday.
What did you all buy?
I was shopping with my friends and I suddenly realized my cart was getting too full.
Did you end up buying everything?
Yes, I took all my items to the counter and waited in line.
I know those lines can be very long, especially when you are in a busy store like Walmart.
Do you want anything from the store?
Are you there right now?
Yeah, it's really busy, I went with some friends.
Did you buy everything already?
No, I'm still on line at the counter with all the stuff we're going to buy.
Sounds like a successful shopping trip.
I was offered a better job.
did it offer a good salary?
Yeah, much better than the previous one.
How much more?
It was about two times as more.
College was worth it.
It was so great working with you guys. I'll miss you.
It's so great that you got such a great new job.
I would have stayed, but the amount they offered me is too much to turn down.
I totally get it. You're very lucky.
I'll always be thankful for the opportunity this company gave me.
We'll miss you.
I was offered the position.
Are you going to take the job?
I have already said yes, it fits with my field and it is four times the pay. I already quit my old job.
I am proud of you. All those years of school have paid off for you.
So, my garden seems to be doing good.
Cool, what are you growing?
Potatoes, which is pretty weird because I don't even like potatoes!
How can you not like potatoes?!?
I don't know, I guess I'm just weird.
Well you can send them my way when they're ready!
I've been putting in a ton of overtime this week.
Why's that, Addison?
We need to open up a new product line, and I've been helping the R&D team come up with something truly unique this week.
What kind of product are you making?
A new social media app that helps people connect after years apart. It should appeal to many older millennials.
Yeah, that's a great idea! I can see why you've been working extra time on such an app.
I really need to get some money.
What do you need the money for?
I need to buy drug.
Why don't you ask for help for this addiction? Like to your family?
They won't help me anymore. That's why I broke into my sister's house to find some money but couldn't.
Well, don't break into my house since I have no money either.
I think this will be the year I turn my grades around
Yeah? I think I heard your mom say something about a tutor
not only that I'm even going after class to each teacher
what made you want to change
I was tired of being the kid who didn't care
well, if you need help with anything I can try
I was having a hard time at school so I decided to get a tutor to help me out
why didn't you just ask me?
I forgot you took that class last year
I aced all the tests and I think I still remember the work
you can help me out too if you want
it will be no problem for me
School is just tough for me.  Every test that I've taken is so hard.  I go to my teachers' office hours and hired a tutor to help me out.
Hope that helps.
I don't know why but school has always been hard.
Do you think you have a learning disability?
No one has ever diagnosed me with one.
See if the tutor can help you do better.
Kendall is a pretty good sport when Cameron needs to run tests on him.
How often does he have to do that?
Pretty frequently. Some of the tests are pretty uncomfortable, so I'm glad he's not too sensitive about it.
I would feel bad hurting him like that.
It's not too bad. Just a little discomfort, and it all in the name of science!
His work will be really important, so it's surely worthwhile for both of them.
So sometimes Carson asks Kendall if he can run experiments on him, but to tell him if he doesn't feel okay about them.
I see, it's nice of him to help
Yes, sometimes they can be quite uncomfortable.
He is getting paid for this, right?
Yes, Carson usually gives him fifty dollars when they are done
Carson should lay off Kendall.
None of the tests he's doing are hurting Kendall.
I know, but they are making her uncomfortable.
He does experiments and she gets paid for her time. It's not like he's forcing her.
She needs the money and he does pay good. I am not happy with this, I feel like he's taking advantage of their friendship.
I know he would never hurt our friend. She's out of her comfort zone but it would unethical for him to hurt her.
I just found out that Jan is the person who's been sleeping with my husband.
Are you kidding me? I can't believe it's Jan.
It is and she's going to pay. I'm going to hide in her house and kill her when she gets home.
Don't say that. And if you're serious...don't freaking tell me about it.
I am absolutely serious. I want revenge bad and I'm going to get it.
Can I borrow your car tonight?
What for?
Yesterday I found out that my husband is sleeping with our neighbor, Jan. So I've decided to kill my husband, and then Jan, and dump the bodies in the desert.
So you want to use my car to transport the bodies? I don't feel real good about that, Skylar.
You are not concerned about the murder, just your car?
I understand you're talking like this because you're hurt and upset now, but don't say that. These guys are not worth you destroying your life.
I know now Jan has been sleeping with my husband and really feel like I want to kill them both.
well, you definitely need to get both out of your life
I think we could kill Jan with sleeping pills by crushing them up in her food
Don't say that. Just get divorce and ask both a lot of money for compensation
sounds like a great plan to me
I just got the torch I lent to a friend back.
The rays are brighter.
Maybe he charged it.
Oh, it was already bright. I saw when you shined it at your friends and they got half blinded.
Yeah, you're right, it's a great torch.
It is indeed.
I shined a flash light at my friends
why? I hope you didn't hurt their eyes
maybe a little but I turned it away because it got in their eyes
I thought as much since those flash lights are so bright
The other day I visited Quinn's house.
His son must have grown up a lot, should be ten now.
Yeah, he sure has grown since I last saw him.
I bet he has, such a nice boy though!
I finally saw Quinn's son today.
Nice. Did you get along?
We didn't get to talk that much.
You should socialize with him more often.
Have you heard I've met Quinn's son?
That kid is so nice and polite, Carson.
Yeah, and he's so big for his age!
He is also a bit shy.
That is okay, he can take his time.
He will warm up to you once he gets to know you a bit better.
I built a house of cards today with the boys.
How big was it?
I gave all of the boys their own set of cards and we all pooled them in together, so the house we built was huge!
That's very cool, but the bigger the house, the quicker it falls.
Yeah, our house of cards collapsed after about ten minutes. Ha-ha!
The boys are having a blast, nothing to worry about.
You don't mind watching them all night?
No, they are building a house of cards with the decks that I gave them.
Will you send me a picture when they get done?
Sure, I will call you when I put them to bed too. Enjoy yourself.
I gave each boy their own set of cards.
What kind of card game requires that many cards?
We were all building houses of cards.
I see, an architectural card game.
I couldn't stop boys from blowing each others' houses down at first.
How high did the tallest house get?
That was one hell of a match and you are one hell of a tag team partner.
I think we should have not put our feet on his neck.
There are no rules when it comes to wrestling.
Don't you feel any guilt that he's in the ER now?
No guilt. We won the match. Right?
I don't want to be your partner anymore. That guy may never walk again and you don't care.
What way to Austin?
Stay on this road for the next 40 miles.
I can't wait to see this rodeo!
I know. This is going to be epic.
Indeed, my friend.
I'm on the road right now driving to Texas.
What are you going to Texas for?
I'm going to see a rodeo there, so I'm headed to Austin.
Texas is a long drive just to see a rodeo.
My brother will be competing in it and I want to be there to support him.
You are a really good sister.
Beautiful weather isn't it
Yea it sure is
I think I'm going to take the dog for a hike
that's a great idea
Let me go grab him and put him in the car
have fun
I took my dog for a hike yesterday.
Where'd you go?
Well, I loaded the dog in the car and we drove to the canyon.
Lots of nice trails there.
Yes, we went on a gentle one and walked for about three miles.
You probably both slept well last night.
are you sure you can keep this a surprise?
you know me. of course I can keep the party a secret
I'm not sure you can because I know you told people before about parties
I promise I will not tell anyone just believe me
I just got off the phone with Tracy. I didn't even realize it but we talked for over an hour.
Dang, that's a long time. What did you two talk about?
Everything! We talk about anything and everything. Work, politics, our love lives, our families...everything.
It's nice to have a friend like that. I love having people you can say anything to.
Tracy is so much fun to talk to
So are you, but I know you two talk about anything
I called Tracy yesterday, we talked for over an hour and only felt like five minutes
Is there anything else you want to talk about before I get back to work?
I'll let you get back to work, but call me when you're done so we can talk some more
Sure thing, I've got plenty more to say
Graduation is coming.
Are you excited about it?
I must pass a final test first.
That is a challenge.
This test determines whether or not I graduate.
What are you doing? Go back to your room and study.
Sorry if I seem tired. I spend all day yesterday studying for the test I took today.
I was wondering why you look tired.
It was an important test that determined whether I graduate or not.
So did you pass the test?
I did. I'm going to reward myself.
You should reward yourself with some sleep.
I stayed up all night studying for this test.
You should have slept. Why did you study for so long?
If I don't pass this test, I won't graduate.
You should have been studying for the past couple of weeks.
I know. I was stupid and waited too long to study.
Well, that's a lesson learned.
I have been cramming for this test all night long.
Why are you waiting until the last minute to study?
I'm not.  I have been cramming because this test will go well or break me.
What do you mean?
This test determines whether or not I will fail.
Okay, I see why you are studying so much.
It was nice of Addison to check my car, as I had no idea what that noise was
How long had it been making that sound
All week actually, at least since Monday
You should always check these issues, otherwise it will get worse until you replace it
This one was an easy enough fix, anything to get rid of that annoying noise
If you bring me the part I can install that for you the next time
The noise coming from my car was scary.
Maybe you should take it in today.
I was actually broke but Addison look at it for me.
Nice of him to check that for you.
I hope it's fixed now.
Yeah, check it out properly soon though.
My car has been making strange noises all week.
Did you get it checked?
Addison checked the car.
What was wrong with it?
The car has been making thumping noises. It's scary.
Let me check your car. May be something simple.
I shouldn't worry about it, Addison also checked it for me yesterday.
I see the problem. It's wear on your tires on the driver's side.
Can you fix it?
It's easy. We will change both of these tires and you'll be ready to go.
I need more money.
So does everyone it seems.
I went to see Addison about making money.
What did he suggest?
He has a plan to plan to make a lot of money in a short amount of time.
What is suggesting, robbing a bank?
I am having trouble with my current job.
What is the problem?
I am making very little money right now and I want a house. So I want to be able to make a lot of money fast.
Okay, do you have a plan?
I went to see Addison to get some suggestions
Okay let us go to Wynn later tonight.
So I need a plan to make a lot of money as I want to buy a new house.
Normally you need to work hard for that.
This is the one time that it’s not working like that.
What are you planning?
I met with Addison yesterday, it’s time for us to make our next move.
You just let me know and I’ll roll with you guys.
I just visited Addison for some scheme.
What did you two do this time?
We hatched a great plan to make money for our car in this summer.
What is it?
We will sell lemonade ,strawberry-lemonade and watermelon-lemonade this summer.
It sounds delicious drinks. I will visit your stand.
I was so glad that I was able to get a friend to come get me.
What happened to you?
My car broke down on a dirt road and I was stranded.
That must have been scary.
It was. But fortunately I had a friend who lived near the area and gave me a ride home.
I hope you treat him out for dinner or something.
I can't believe that my car broke down.
Well, how did you get home?
I had to call a friend to get a ride.
It's good you had your phone on you.
Yeah, I wouldn't have wanted to stay stranded.
You are right, that wouldn't have been fun.
Sorry I couldn't talk when you called last night but I was in the middle of the movie and I really wanted to see the rest.
Jazmine said it was good, but she also said it's over three hours.
I know it sounds like a really long time, but the story is so good that you don't even know how long you have been watching.
So you think it was worth spending all of that time on it.
Definitely, I think it's the best movie I ever watched!
I guess I will have to give it a try too.
Wow, what a hell of a twist. I didn't expect him to be the queen's missing son.
Where did you get that idea? He's was the queen's slave.
But read between the lines. No slaves was spared after their rebellion failed.
Anyway, 3 hours is quite a long time for a movie, but it was worth it. Best movie ever!
I agree.
I feel like I want to watch it again.
So I got a confession.
What it is?
After watching and re-watching this movie  for hours I gotta say this is the best movie ever.
That's a big claim.
I watched that movie for a long time then decided it was the best movie ever.
What movie are you talking about?
It's the one with Sharon Stone in it.
She was in a bunch of movies.
It's one she was in when she was younger with Michael Douglas.
You mean Basic Instinct?
The dresses the they are wearing look amazing
I love the designs on them and the stripes look great too
I wonder how much these clothes go for
I think they start at around 500 dollars a dress
wow, that is a little expensive
I have been in Hollywood for about a year.
I've known you for about month.  Why did you come out here?
A talent recruiter said I could be the next Hollywood sex symbol.
How'd it go?
Well, after I'd come across about 1000 beautiful actresses, I figured it was more likely I'd be the next Hollywood starving waitress.
I'm afraid you were right.
I had to ride the bus to school again.
Why won't your mom let you walk, it is only 2 blocks away!
She thinks that I will be kidnapped and killed, She is crazy!
Well the bus stop is well lit, and the road is dark in the morning. I guess she is right.
I hate riding that bus every morning.
Why, what's wrong with it?
It's always so loud and crowded. And it smells bad.
That sounds like a bad way to start the day.
It is. You're so lucky you live close enough to walk to school.
You're right. I never have to deal with the bus at all.
It was really sweet of Quinn to touch me like that, brushing my fingers with her head. She is so sweet.
You two are so are sweet together!
I am really happy I met Quinn.
Wow, that's so romantic.
And we're planning to do something special tonight. Just the two of us.
I think you'll have a lot of fun to get to know each other.
Quinn and I are celebrating our 50th wedding anniversary this year.
That is nice.
He bought me a big ring.
He is a good man.
Quinn lightly brushed my fingers and handed it to me.
You're a lucky lady.
Quinn lightly brushed my fingers with his head today.
He just loves your hair and you.
You know I am sensitive about my hair.
I guess he doesn't know that.
Now I have to tell him.
He was probably just trying to be romantic.
I think I was able to get a good price on this house in the end
How much were you able to finally get it down to in the end
we eventually settled on 75000 but I will have to do a few small repairs and I think I can make some money off of it
sounds like you made a really good deal and did a great job
I love the house I bought!
How did you get the good price?
I told the realtor that I'm Donald Trump's cousin!
He believed you?
Yep!  He had me sign the papers right away!
He didn't even do a background check?
We got a good bid price on a really nice house.
How did you guys end up doing that?
We just played our cards right and got lucky.
That's great to hear, will you be moving in soon?
Well it depends if our bid is accepted but I sure hope so. I love that house!
I'm wishing the best for you! I'm sure you will get it.
I just bought a house.
Wow, congratulations! Was it expensive?
Actually, no. I bid on a nice house and got it for a good price.
That's good to know. When will you move in?
In about a month. I'll have a housewarming party and you're invited!
That sounds fun!
I almost got caught dozing off in class today.
What happened?
I got called on to respond to a question.
Did you answer?
I gave a try and got it right!
Wow. Bet the professor thought he got you on that one. Good for you.
Man, I fell asleep in class and the professor totally tried to embarrass me.
How?
He asked me to answer the question he asked about the book, and I ended up getting it correct.
Did you read the book?
Yeah, but I don't remember the professor asking the question at all.
That's incredible.
It has been forever since I had seen my sister. Sometimes I wish I would have never taken that job in San Diego.  I am so far away from everybody.
It must have been nice to see her after all this time.  How long has it been, 2 years?
Yes it has been that long.  I miss everyone.
I'm sure everyone wants to get up together with you.  Are you free tonight?
No I am spending time with my family tonight, first and foremost.
I understand, well we will hang out tomorrow friend.
I just visited my sister . I have not seen her for years . She was living in LA and finally got back East.
I'm sure you missed her a lot.
Yeah, it was so nice to see her in person. We have both been so busy at work and with family .
It's always good to stay in touch with relatives. It's so difficult these days to find close relationships.
I'm going to throw a huge party because my friends and family were coming to town for vacation.
That sounds great.
What theme?
Hawaii!
I love that.
Me too!
I threw a big party on Saturday.
What was the party for?
Some of my friends and family were coming to town for vacation.
Oh, I've been wanting to meet your friends and family for some time.
Next time be there.
I'm having a big party tonight!
Are we invited?
Yes and all my family is coming too.  It's going to be huge!
What all activities are we doing?
Well my family is taking care of the food.  I organized a karaoke session and dance competition to keep things interesting.
That's awesome.  I can't wait to come!
I got a whole bunch of friends and family coming into town last week.
Wow. How did you handle that?
I threw a huge party and invited them all.
That's a very efficient way of dealing with so many people.
I've decided I'm going to the shelter this weekend to adopt a dog.
That's great.  Can I go with you?
Sure, maybe you can help me make a decision.
I'm so excited for you.  Why did you decide now is the right time?
Well, with working from home because of the virus, I feel like I have time to get a dog settled in before I have to go back to the office.
I can't wait to find the perfect puppy pal for you!
Guess what? I'm going to get a dog!
That's so fun! Are you going to buy a puppy from a pet store?
No, I don't think so. I don't really want to support puppy mills.
I agree. Puppy mills should be outlawed.
I'm going to look at the local animal shelter instead.
I can't wait to meet your new dog and join you on a walk at the park!
I've wanted a dog for awhile now and decided to check out the animal shelter in town.
You still don't  have a dog why didn't you get one?
I did I just can't bring her home yet.
What is she sick or something? Why would you want to adopt a sick dog?
No, its nothing like that I have to wait until she gets spayed then I pick her up from the vet.
That isn't going to make for a very good first few days.
Taylor had grabbed me by the hair and refused to let go.
Why did he do that?
He was being annoying.  I don't know why he doesn't most things.
He needs to grow up.
I have to live with him everyday.  He's my bothersome brother.
Maybe he's just bored and wants to play.
We had an epic wrestling match  last night.
Who are you wrestling?
I was wrestling Taylor.
That definitely sounds like a great match.
It was one for the ages.
I’m so mad I missed it, I hope you guys fight  again.
Last night Taylor grabbed me firmly and refused to let me go!
Why?
Nothing, we were just playing around.
Was it wrestling?!
Nah, just random fighting.
You two are funny!
Riley was over at our house this weekend.
She’s back in town?
Yeah, she is here for a week, sleeping on the couch. I gave her my favourite blanket.
I have to catch up with her.
Do you want me to give her your number?
That’s a great idea.
Riley spent the night on my couch the other night.
Were you guys drinking?
Yeah I didn't want him driving home.
It's good you were looking out for him.
Absolutely. I just gave him a blanket and had him spend the night.
Better safe than sorry.
Riley had another fight with her boyfriend and stayed with us last night.
She really just needs to leave him.
I keep telling her, but I just gave her a blanket and let her sleep on the couch this time.
That was kind of you to give her something to cover up with and let her crash with you guys.
I feel so proud of myself after going on so many interviews and landing a job
that's the job you have been talking about all week?
we got weekends off with raises every three months and free Starbucks coffee in the morning
sounds like you hit the jackpot
hopefully everything works out for me
My car broke down so I'm walking to go get gas.
How far away are you parked?  Let me take you to get gas.
Are you sure?
Yes.  I don't mind.  There's still plenty of time for us both to get to school without being late.
Thank you so much!  I owe you one!
Not a problem.  Anytime friend!
This is such a pain for me!
What happened?
My car broke down and I don't know what to do exactly
I totally understand you pain.  I think you'll make it through
of course I will.  I just need to find a place to walk up and get gas
yeah that's not a bad idea
I didn't want the night to ever have to end.
What did you all do after you left the movie?
I took Tracy to the lake and we sat and watched the sunset.
That's really sweet, Addison.
I know. I held her in my arms and we just enjoyed the moment.
It sounds like you were both really happy.
I'm so in love mate. I am so smitten
Haha! butterflies in your stomach right?
You are right buddy. You see how I always hold Tracy down man!
Yeah! I saw you and her walking hand in hand without a care of the world Addison
I love this girl dude. I am so content with her
I know that mate, You guys are happy together. Keep her happy man!
So, I was out today doing some shopping and I happened to walk past my favorite store.
Oh nice! Did you buy anything at the store?
No, but I noticed a new dress, so of course I had to go inside and get a good look at it.
Did you try it on?
No, I didn't. How about you come with me tomorrow and I will? You can tell me what you think of the dress.
I would love to! I love shopping for dresses. I'll see you tomorrow!
I decided to go to the outlet mall yesterday and they had a lot of sales.
Did you buy anything?
We were walking by American Eagle Outfitters when we saw the cutest dress on a mannequin in the window.
I love that store!
I know, it's my favorite too so we went inside to see if they had my size but they didn't.
That's too bad because their dresses are always adorable.
I said no to a proposition that involved committing and kind of crime?
Depends on what you would consider a crime though?
If it involves anything that can get me arrested, I am not interested.
What if it involves a crime, but the pay out could change your life?
The answer is no, I can't take advantage of the pay out of I am in jail.
Yeah, you're wise.
I'm really proud of myself.
Why? What did you do?
I was called this morning and offered a position on a new team. They are looking to rob the bank on 1st Street.
Skylar, I appreciate that you trust me with that information and I am proud of you too for overcoming something so bad. But you know I'm a cop, right?
You are a mall security guard.
It is still my duty to report it. I'm glad you won't be a part of it. This crew will be getting in serious trouble.
Look the trap has caught a baby deer.
Don't you feel bad when you kill an animal?
I kinda feel bad when I see them suffer.
You should do something for that poor deer.
Yes, I will carefully remove this trap.
You're an expert hunter after all.
These horrible poachers always leaving their stuff around
I know its gotten bad recently
well I'm taking this trap down and any more I see
good, they litter everywhere too
They are just lucky I haven't caught them out here while I was hunting
Me too, they are bad not just hunters like me.
I'm so mad at Quinn! She's such a brat!
What did she do now? She's always getting under your skin.
She stole my skateboard! I found her riding it at the skate park.
Doesn't she have her own board?
Yes! But she likes mine better I guess. Probably just because it's mine.
Well you've been looking to buy that one at the shop. Maybe you should just buy it and give Quinn your old one.
I wanted to go skating yesterday but couldn't find my board.
Oh no, you lost it?
Well, I went to the skate park and my stupid sister Quinn had it.
She took it without even asking?
Yeah, I was so mad.  I need to put a lock on my bedroom door.
Not a bad idea, man.
I thought it was enough time for us to read all the books before the final date.  They teacher had just told us the date, so I raised my hand in protest.
Did the teacher change the date?
The final date cannot be changed.  It's already on the last day of school.
What's going to happen?
My teacher agreed that the workload for the class was too much and we probably have time to get to the last book.  He removed a book from our reading list.
Cool.  One less book to read.
It just doesn't make sense that we have two weeks to complete a 4 week project! The teacher wasn't being fair!
Did you say something or ask for more time?
Of course, as soon as he said the final date due, my hand was up in the air!
What was his response?
He wouldn't call on me, he ignored me completely because he knows he is not being fair!
Wow I wonder why he is doing that
That guy you with last night, what is his name?
Chris, why?
I think that he is the person the person that robbed that bank on 9th.
We need to call the police right now and report it.
I am so nervous about this presentation.
Don't be...I've seen you practice.
This presentation is about space travel.
What aspect of space travel?
How the astronauts take a shower in space.
Interesting. You would think water would just float away.
Hey, I found a stray dog when I came out of the grocery store. I have it in my car right now.
Oh, no! The poor thing!
Yeah, I gave it some food but I need to take it to the shelter. My parents won't let me keep him. Can you come with me?
Yes, I just need to take a shower. I can be ready in about an hour. Is that okay?
Of course! I appreciate you coming with me. This is breaking my heart.
You know I'm always here for you when you need it!
While working along the street yesterday I came across a stray dog!
I dislike stray dogs.
This is actually friendly. I picked it up and named it Addison
Where is it now!
I took it to the animal shelter
Great choice
I nearly hit a stray dog with my car yesterday.
That must have been very scary!
Indeed, it was. I did pick up the stray dog and he was friendly enough.
Are you going to keep the dog?
No, we have no room. I've already taken him to the animal shelter.
I suppose that's best. It will keep him off the streets.
I'm glad we found the stray dog, but I feel bad about having to put him in a shelter.
Don't worry. They'll find a home for him.
I'm afraid that they won't be able to keep him too long.
No. That shelter does not put dogs to sleep. Don't worry.
Oh. Thank God. I'm not allowed another dog, or I would have kept him myself.
I know. And who knows? Maybe they'll be able to find his owner.
Taylor is really a good math student. She's just a whiz at it.
Is she? I didn't know that.
Yes, I put her at the head of the class right a way. She's easily the best student.
She's going to go far in life, that's for sure.
I really love math class.
I know you do Bailey, and you're great at it!
Yeah, but Taylor is the best.
I've heard that, and also that you nominated her I am going to be the head of the math class after you.
Yeah it's time to recognise she is better, she was so happy aboutit.
Oh my gosh, I found the 2000 dollars thanks to Addison's help!
You did?  Where?
By the couch.
See, I knew it would turn up.
I was so worried that I had lost it.  That would have been terrible.
Yes, it would.  Well, glad you found it!
I was so worried thinking I lost 200 dollars last night.
I know Addison helped you look.
Yeah, although it was my fault. I had a lot to drink. I should have been more responsible.
Did you find the wallet in the end?
Yes, I found it the day after. Oh boy! What a relief!
Glad to hear you found it.
I can't believe I lost 200 dollars at Addisons
oh wow were you able to find it?
eventually we did the next day, Addison helped me
that is great, why were you at her house?
we were drinking together
oh well at least you both had fun
I thought I lost 200 dollars at Addison's yesterday.  I was there drinking.  I went back to his place to look for it. Addison found the money.
I love it when people find things.  I misplace or lose my stuff all the time.
Especially with my forgetfulness, life can be difficult.  I had the money in my pocket.  The bills must have fallen out.
Maybe you should put them in a wallet.
My wallet got stolen on a train ride.  I haven't bought another one yet.  That's a good idea.
If it's bulky enough, it's easier to find. My wallet is gigantic.
I was really proud of Jan today at work for doing the right thing.
What did she do?
She helped me confront the trespassers at work.
Well, you guys are the security at work.
Yeah, but still. It can be a scary thing to do sometimes.
I'm just glad you guys are both okay.
I made fun of myself at work. I burst into tears like a baby!
What happened? What was bothering you?
It was just all the pent up emotion about losing my cat.
I understand. That cat was part of your family, it's normal!
Yeah. I actually had to go home early. I'm hoping my boss understands.
I'm sure he will. Everyone gets upset when they lose a pet.
I had a bad day at work yesterday.
What happened?
I cried at work.
Why?
I've just had so much stress lately and pent up emotion from my divorce that I just burst into tears.
Well, I hope you're feeling better now.
I cant hold it in anymore.
What's wrong?
I gotta cry, I know we're in the office but I have so many things happening recently.
It's ok, I'm here if you want to talk.
Hi, how are you today? My day was awful. I finally started crying like a baby and couldn't stop for a long time.
Yeah, I know the feeling, we nurses can only take so much before it begins to break us down.
After the fifth patient today died while on a ventilator, I just had to let it out somehow.
Plus we are putting our lives on the line every time we do a shift.
Well, I finally pulled myself together and soldiered on.
I'll be so relieved when vaccinations for this coronavirus are finally available. I know you will be, too.
I hate the winter, it's too cold.
That's why we have houses and cars.
My car was in the shop and I had to walk home yesterday.
How far did you walk?
It was only a mile, but I walked fast to stay warm.
Next time you can call me and I'll give you a ride if it's too cold to walk.
I'm going to walk home.
Man it is way too cold for that.
Yea I will run right now to keep myself warm!
Okay, sounds good.
You gotta be kidding me.
I'll race you!
it was freezing outside
you walked home today? there's a blizzard coming!
I walked fast to keep my body temp up
Yeah there's going to be a cold spell every day
I'll take the car tomorrow
you definitely need to
It was so cold out that I was walking home super fast.
I mean it is negative ten degrees outside.
I felt like I would be frozen in place if I slowed down.
Were you wearing warm clothes?
Yes but I could still feel it through my ski jacket.
Cold weather like this is just unnatural.
I think I just made things worse with my other friend.
You do tend to be your own worst enemy sometimes. What happened?
I got into a fight with him and then I made it worse by talking about him behind his back. I basically rubbed salt into the wound that is our fractured relationship.
You two haven't been getting along for years. You should probably stop being friendly with each other and go your separate ways.
I got a bad fight with a friend but I got some good punches in there.
Quince, my boy, you should not mess with him if you're friends.
I may go back for more. I don't like the guy. Come with me!
Quince! The man is built like a tank. Leave him alone. He didn't mean to pop you in the eye.
Maybe you're right but I can't stand the guy! I will tell him he's ugly just to rub some salt in the wound.
You know he is a good guy, a pacifist, body builder, practices Buddhism, helps the poor, gave up all vices and dedicated his life to the less fortunate. Don't be horrible only because of a fight.
My girlfriend is still pissed at me.
You embarrassed her if front of all of us, by making fun of her dress.
I was just trying to liven up the party.
You did that! Rule number one, don't piss out the girlfriend in front of her friends.
You should have given me that rule, before the party!
She will come around, send her some flowers and chocolate.
My girlfriend made me sleep on the couch last night because I embarrassed her in front of her friends.
Why would you do something like that?
She was wearing this goofy dress and I accidentally made fun of it in front of everybody.
Never make fun of your girlfriend's outfit in public, Bailey. That's the number one rule of a healthy relationship.
I always learn the hard way.
My girlfriend is totally mad at me because I joked about her dress looking like a bee.
That wasn't nice of you.
It was yellow and black . I could not help myself. Everyone was laughing.
You just made fun of your girlfriend. She is going to be really angry at you for a while.
I guess that was a bad idea.
I made a new friend at school today.
What is this new friend's name?
Mark. I was nervous I couldn't make new friends.
Was Mark also nervous like you?
No, Mark is confident and talks to everyone.
Do you wish you could be more like Mark?
This might get interesting.
How was your first day of school?
I was really nervous but made a new friend at the end of the day.
That's cool I'm happy for you.
I really, really loved school today. For the first day...it was fantastic.
Was it different being in high school?
It was like night and day. I made a new friend already, too.
That nice. I'm glad you liked going.
I can't wait until tomorrow.
I had my first day of high school today.
How did it go?
I was super nervous but I made a new friend already.
That's great. How did you meet?
Her locker is next to mine and we had class together too.
Oh I hope you keep the friendship going. That's wonderful you share class.
I have been walking Sasha's dog.
Oh, is she out of town?
Yeah and I was concerned about the dog being sad.
That is very considerate of you.
Thanks! I have always loved animals.
I am sure the dog and Sasha really appreciate it!
I took Sasha's dog out today for a walk.
Where's Sasha?
She's out of town for the day and asked me to check in on it and I took it for a walk.
You are a good neighbor!
I love animals and the dog is sweet. I didn't want it to be sad.
Yes, dogs miss  their owners. That was really kind of you.
I have been walking Sasha's dog since she's been out of town. I don't want her to be lonely.
That is really nice of you. I bet she's happy to see you everyday.
Yeah she comes to the door and wags her tail like I'm the greatest treat in the world.
Dogs are so sweet. They love so easily.
I am walking Skylar's dog tonight at 9 and then I'll be over.
Why are you walking Skylar's dog? Where is Skylar?
Skylar is out of town for a few days and since the dog is familiar with me, it made sense for me to do it.
OK. Well I'll have all the food ready when you get here. Be safe walking that dog in the dark.
I will see you soon.
Ok. Don't forget to be safe.
Man this dog is evil.
What are you doing Skylar?
Walking Sasha's dog. But she's so friendly and hard to control.
Why don't you give her a treat? Or take her home?
I can't take her home. I don't want her to be there alone, lonely without Sasha. Maybe I'll give her a treat.
That will probably work.
I cut Cameron's hair.
I saw it; it looks good.
Yes, he couldn't afford to go to a shop.
Would you cut my hair?
Are you broke too?
No, I just like the job you did.
Money is so tight theses days with us both being unemployed
The economy is rough, not a lot of work these days.
Cameron got an interview and needed a hair cut and we didn't have enough money for it so I cut it myself.
How'd it look?  Were you guys scared you would mess it up?
It looked pretty good actually, I watched a couple of youtube videos and grabbed my scissors and clippers and got to it.
Glad it worked out well, I hope Cameron gets the job.
I just got back from Cameron's house.
How is he doing by the way haven't seen him in a while.
He's doing well he asked me to come over to give him a hair cut.
That was nice of you, how did it turn out?
I think I did a good job looks like he was pleased.  I know he's been short on money so I volunteered to help him.
That was sweet of you! Do you have a picture of how it turned out?
I was making love to my boyfriend the other night and it was really sensual.
Oh that is a bit more info than I needed to know.
We were holding hands and moaning as we moved. It was very special.
I am glad it was special for you, but please stop telling me about your sex life.
Ok, but I was just telling you so you know how wonderful our love life is.
That is nice, but again don't tell me anymore.
I had such a good time last night
Did you hold your partner's hand while you stayed there together so it lasts longer?
Yeah, but I couldn't keep my moans down while he moved.
Okay, now it's probably too much information!
I really enjoyed my most recent moment of pleasure!
You tend to enjoy it with someone you love
Yes! I held hands with my partner and moaned so he knows how I feel!
with the way you describe it, your partner is a pro
He truly tries his best to understand what I need or want!
Oh my goodness, I am tired.
That is too bad Sydney. What were you doing?
I have been cleaning the house all day because my in-laws are coming over.
Well, I'm glad you are done. That is sure stressful.
It sure is. This is the first time I am sitting down all day.
I am glad you are finally resting.
Thanks for recommending aloe vera for my rash.
Is it helping you?
It has helped me not to scratch so much and my skin seems to be getting better.
My mom always has us use it when we have a rash.
I wish that I asked you about it sooner because I am tired of people asking me what's wrong with my arms.
I wondered why you had long sleeves on today.
It's the house here.
I'll bring up the food, Kai.
it doesn't look like anyone is home.
I've rung the doorbell, but no one is getting the door. I guess we will have to leave our Chinese takeaway food here.
I'm going to write a note.
Good idea.
Kai said she wanted to ask me something earlier, did she tell you what she needs?
Yeah she said that she was asked to work an extra day on Saturday but she doesn't have day-care, and if there is any way you could watch her children for a couple of hours?
Of course! That's what friends are for!
Thank you so much, I'm sure Casey is very happy to have a friend like you.
I am happy to help!
And Kai's kid is such a sweetheart! I also babysit her sometimes. 
I love babysitting for Kai when she's away on business.  She's such a great mum .
I know!  And her kids are just such a joy.  They are the most well-behaved kids I've ever met.
And Kai pays me really well, too.  When I keep her kids for three days she pays me five hundred dollars, and twelve hundred when I keep them for a week.
Does Kai provide stuff like the kids favorite foods, and gas for the car, and things like that?
Yeah, she provides everything.  But honestly I would do it for free because Kai has been my best friend since we were in high school.
My mom always told me, If you're good at something, never do it for free.  So don't feel bad about taking what Kai pays you!
Do you know I'm going to Kai's place this weekend?
I think you mentioned going there to watch over Kai's kids this week.
Yeah, I love her kids and it's not a big deal for me.
I think it'll be great to catch up without the kids next time and invite Kai as well.
Okay, yeah maybe next weekend we can go see a show.
I'm going to tell Kai to get a babysitter and we can go check out a show then.
I wanted to bake the best cookies and I wanted to make them my way
I totally understand that
So I even added some chocolate chips in there to make everything taste even better
That is so awesome.  You definitely did your best to have delicious cookies
Thanks.  I really do my best to try
I can tell
My kitchen is a total mess right now.
Wow, there's so much flour everywhere.
I know, I'm in the process of baking chocolate chip cookies.
Are you having a bake sale tomorrow or something?
No, I was just hungry for cookies and had the ingredients on hand to bake them.
I want to try one when they come out of the oven.
What are we having to snack on while we watch the movie?
I have cookie dough we can bake or popcorn, which do you prefer?
Let's bake the cookies, I've been hankering a cookie all week
Perfect, turn the oven on and I will get the bowl
Did you make this dough, it is perfect!
Of course I did, I don't play when it comes to my cookies, you know that!
I'm so worried about Jan.
Why, what's wrong?
He just went to the doctor today to examine a lump on his neck.
Oh, wow, do you think it's serious?
Honestly I have no idea. I fear the worst. His dad died of cancer.
Oh wow. Well, I hope it's nothing serious!
I am waiting for Jan to come back from the doctor, she went to have a lump checked. I really hope that it is benign.
Are you sure? Many women Jan's age are diagnosed with cancer.
It does not cause her pain, so that is a huge plus in my eyes.
I think that is Jan coming down the street, I'll leave you two alone but let me know how it went later.
I will call you soon.
Thank you, and fingers crossed.
I just drive Jan  to the doctor's and I'm waiting now.
You're a great friend. I hope she is okay.
Hopefully, it's nothing. She has a new lump, it's not the first time but her lumps usually just go away.
But I heard Jan saying that this one is solid and really hand, and she can't turn her neck.
Yeah, that's why she is going to the doctor this time, we're a bit worried.
I would also worry, Fingers crossed it's nothing.
I should have gone with Jen to see what's up with that lump, it feels so weird.
No Addison, she asked you not to go.
She shouldn't have to face this alone. They will probably just do a bunch of tests, but I want to be there with her when she gets the results.
I see why you do, that's the scary part.
I hope it was the best thing to do to just wait.
It probably is, as it is actually easier to talk to a doctor without a worried love there.
I’m running so late! I can’t even remember if I grabbed everything. What am I forgetting?
Slow down, Taylor. Let’s think. You’ve got your phone, jacket, bag...what else?
My water bottle. Okay, got that. Wait, where are my keys? Oh no...
What’s wrong?
My car keys! I forgot them at my grandma’s house!
Do you have any back-up keys? We’ve got to go!
I was in such a big rush to leave the house and couldn't find my keys.  Then I realized I had left that at my grandmother's house.
How far away does she live?
Over an hour away!  I had to take a taxi to work.
Have you gotten your keys back yet?
No, my mom is going to drive me back to my grandmother's tomorrow.
So one more day without a car!  Let me know if there's anywhere you need me to take you.
I have just had the worst day ever
Oh no what happened?
I was late to work and left the house, but forgot I left my car keys at my grandma's house
I'm so sorry to hear that. Did everything end up being okay?
Yeah I was only 10 minutes late to work
Okay, I'm glad it wasn't too bad!
Mine and Jesse's gangs were at war and a lot of lives have been lost already.  This needs to stop.
How are you going to stop it?
It's just senseless violence.  I surrendered so that Jesse can spare my life.
Someone needs to give in.
That's right.  So many strong egos involved and it all leads to bloodshed.
Have you thought about getting out of the gang?
I'm officially out of gang life. I gave up...I'm tired of fighting with my gang against Jesse's.
I am so relieved to hear you say that, Robin.
Yeah, my gang has been up against Jesse's gang for years. We lost a lot of members.
All for nothing, really.
Yes, just pride. I surrendered and so far, I'm still alive.
We were at war with Jesse's gang!
I learnt about it but not too much!
A lot of lives were lost during the war.
Ohhh! so what was the outcome?
I finally surrendered and Jesse spared my life
Ohhh! I'm glad you're out of that and safe!
Riley explained almost everything to me and gave me an easy task to start with.
That's good Jesse, to start with this easy task.
I think I can do that.
Then you will have to just slowly progress into the harder ones, but not too quickly!
Okay, I got it.
Cameron felt nervous, so I helped him think about things differently so he could feel better.
What was he nervous about?
He was trying out for the football team.  He wasn't sure if he would make it.
Did he make the team?
He'll be on it for next year.
So excited to watch him play.
I told Cameron there's no reason to be nervous.
But you know he doesn't like evaluations.
None of us do but he was so nervous that he was shaking.
He told me he felt like he can't do anything right in this job and he's worried about not doing good in anything.
Cameron really needs more confidence and his evaluation is fine.
I think he was worried about losing his job because he feels criticized sometimes.
I hosted Ash at my cabin in the woods over the weekend.
Isn't your cabin really tricky to find?
No, not really since they built a trail to it directly from my house.
Well, a trail certainly makes it easier to locate.
Yes, I just told Ash to follow the trail.
I'm glad the two of you were able to enjoy a quiet, secluded weekend.
I told Ash to follow the trail from my house to the cabin that is in the woods.
Is it a completely straight path?
Yes, it is completely straight.
So there are no turns that Ash will have to take?
Absolutely not.
I wonder if Ash got to the cabin safely. I gave her directions?
You let her go into the woods by herself.
I was at work. I told her I'd go with afterwards but she didn't want to wait.
What direction was she going?
I told her to just follow the trail to the cabin.
I have a student who failed his mid-term terribly.
How come they failed the test?
Well her name is Jordan and she sometimes gets lazy. I know she didn't study.
Are you going to let her take a make-up exam?
I want to but it's against school policy.
Well I guess she will get the grade that she deserves now, won't she?
Jordan failed his History test because he didn't study.  That's unlike him.  He's a good student.
He probably got busy with other things.
He's been looking distracted in class lately.
I'll ask if he's doing alright.  He's in my English class.  I have noticed him dozing off a couple of times.
He'll be in office hour this week.  I'll talk to him too.
I think he might have a lot going on.
I don't think Jordan is working much recently, he failed his test too!
He told me he's been too boggled down with family problems.
This is why he failed the test, but he didn't study as well
I think he had a lot to do and his family issues are piling up
We should talk about that
I already suggested Jordan to seek a counselor
I feel so sorry that Jordan failed his exam yesterday.
I saw him just playing around right before taking the test.
He must not have studied his lessons.
I guess so.
There was nothing I could do for him.
That will teach him a lesson.
So I had to bring the dog back to the shop today.
What happened?
It wasn't the breed I was expecting. It looked just like the dog I wanted, but it's a completely different species!
Wow, somebody at the pet store should have told you that before you bought it and took it home.
I know. I had to look it up on the internet!
I ended up taking the dog back to the store because it wasn't actually pure bred.
What type of dog were you looking for?
I wanted a full blooded German shepherd puppy but I got a test and it is only 35%.
Wow, so you paid full price and that dog is probably only worth half that much if not less?
Yeah, I was super upset about it, but I just got my money back.
I would write a really negative review about that store so other people know they like ripping customers off.
I think the nurse is annoyed at me because I keep calling her in here.
That is what they are here for.
Yeah but some of the things were very trivial and they have other patients too.
I can help you with things here if you don’t want to bother them.
Could you go get me another bottle of water?
Sure thing, I’ll bring a few since there is a fridge in here.
The nurses here are not responding to my calls. This hospital has poor service.
Well I think you need to give them a break. You have been calling them too often for very minor things.
But that's their job. They need to accommodate everything I need.
That is the thing, they are here for all your needs, not your wants.
I don't like them. I think they have an attitude towards me.
Too bad and I think the feeling is mutual. With your attitude I don't think they like you either.
I got Jordan a gift.
When did you give it to him?
I gave it to him today.
What did Jordan think?
He made a face of disgust.
That's too bad!
I'm think Jordan hated the gift I got him.
I'm sure he liked it. Why do you think not?
He opened it and made a disgusted face, but said it was cool.
Did you pick out something blue? Jordan hates blue.
How did I not know this? I've been friends with him for years!
That's why he always wears red. I can't believe you never noticed!
So, I got Jordan a gift.
Did she like it?
No, when she opened it, she made a face of disgust.
Well, that was rude.
Yes, I spent a lot of money on it too.
Next time don't buy Jordan anything.
Do you ever wonder if my head was not attached to my body, if I would lose it.
All the time! What did you forget this time?
I got all the way up the stairs and than realized I had forgot my drink.
You are always forgetting things, but at least you are getting exercise.
Well, I guess that is true, but I would rather remember things.
Well wouldn't we all!
Today I had a close call. I'm very relived.
You're relieved? What happened today?
I was headed up the stairs but something didn't feel right. I realized I didn't have my wallet with me.
That's no good. Did you try retracing your steps?
I thought it couldn't have been too far away. Since I had walked up 4 flights of stairs I simply reversed course and went back down. My wallet was lying near the doorway.
It's a good thing you remembered so quickly. If you took a couple more minutes, your wallet could have been a lost cause.
I need to get my shirt upstairs.
Okay, I am waiting.
Oh, I can't find the key to my room.
I think it fell off when you were climbing the stairs.
Let me trace it back.
Be quick, we have to go.
I am so tired from walking up and down stairs.
Why did you have to do that?
I forgot something after I had got to the top, and had to retrace my steps.
You should move to my apartment. We have an elavator installed here.
I don't understand why you guys are so mad at me. Explain this to me. No one will talk to me.
You stole Shawn's cat.
No, I didn't! Let me explain!
Let me finish, stop interrupting. Stealing a pet from you friend is not very nice
I didn't! She gave it to me then.
I don't want any excuses!
I am infuriated, why can't you hear what I am trying to say!
It doesn't matter what your opinion is, what matters is my opinion.
That's not fair! I've been trying to express myself all evening, and nobody will listen!
It's because we all know you better than you think.
That's not fair! This is an injustice, maybe I have something of value to add.
Maybe, anyway, I need to go now.
I was arguing with Bob yesterday.
What was it about?
He said I had stolen his tennis racket, and have to give it back.
Did you take it?
No, I borrowed it, and can't find it. He kept yelling and wouldn't let me explain.
Sounds as if you couldn't get a word in edgewise.
I'm just trying to defend myself.
You can barely talk, can't you?
No I can't, not even word right now.
Are you going to be able to recover?
I hope so, it will be good.
It will be fine, just give it a bit of time?
Guess who just interviewed for a new job, today?
Congratulations! I know you've been looking for work.
I've been having trouble finding places that are hiring. Riley happened to come across a business that was hiring and asked me to apply.
What kind of work are you looking for?
I applied at the local bank.
Thanks for showing me the add for my new position.  I wouldn't have it without you.
No problem.  I seen it in the newspaper, and I knew that it would be perfect for you.
Well, so far so good.  The job has been perfect so far.
That is nice to know Robin.
So, I need your opinion.
Of course, how can I help you
I'm deciding if I should save my last 30 bucks on groceries or spend it on a haircut
Maybe you should just save it and cut it yourself
Gee, why didn't I think of that!
That's why I'm here for
How do the kids hair look?
It looks fine. I mean a little uneven, but fine.
I did it myself.
Wait, you cut your kids own hair?
Yes, I'm trying to save some money for a family trip.
Well I guess that's a good way to save up.
I had to cut everyone's hair over the weekend.
Why did you do that? Barbers and salons have opened back up.
I know, but the whole family want a trip to Disney, and I need to save my money.
That's a little expensive, with being out of work all these month.
With the stimulus and unemployment, we are doing okay. I just need to cut corners, like with the haircuts.
I understand. I could use a vacation myself.
I can't believe we've reached our goal at the shelter! We're going to be able to build a larger shelter.
Are you serious? We need to find a way to raise some money
I know, and there are so many unwanted cats around. I hope this gives them a chance to find a home.
You are so soft-hearted. It takes a good soul to volunteer and raise that much money for the shelter.
I got the last donation in today for the animal shelter. They're relocating to the big building on 31st Street.
I can't believe you did it. Those cats are going to be so happy to be fed and maybe adopted.
It's going to take a while to round up all the strays. I have a trap and neuter plan in place, too.
Wow, you really have all these thought through. I can't believe you know so much about this.
I have been watching those strays for a while, and learning about the city's responses.
Combined with the new building, I am sure there are going to be a lot of happy new pet owners soon.
I raised money to build a bigger animal shelter in my neighborhood
oh that is great, what made you want to do that?
I just felt bad seeing stray cats around
me too I always wonder how they are feeling, and what they need
me too, so I want to try and help them
that is great of you to do, and I bet they love you for it
Could you contribute some funds to my kitty, buddy?
Sure, but only if I know what it is about
I have built a bigger animal shelter for stray cats around and, I need to equip the houses
What made you do that, Jordan?
I felt awful seeing cats running all around this place. Its a disturbing sight
I get it you animal lover , that's a good move
Hey, you know all those stray cats, that are always wandering around?
Oh yeah, I always see a cute little siamese, that I can never catch.  It makes me feel bad.
I always felt bad too.  I helped raise a bunch of money for a better animal shelter so they have more room for them at the ASPCA.
Wow, are they still taking donations?
Yes, I think you can go to their website and there's a link.
Wow, thanks for letting me know, I'll be sure to give them $5.
You will never believe what Robin did last night!
I think I heard, was that Robin who went into the woods last night?
It was, she said she heard the craziest noises and decided to go check it out.
What is it that she found?
She found two big black bears trying to get into our wooden hut that we built, and scared them away.
Wow, that is brave! I can't believe she risked her own safety just for some property!
Do you hear all those noises, Robin?
Yes, I do, it sounds like someone is trying to break in.
I am so scared, what should we do.
Don't worry I will protect you from any harm.
Thanks Robin just be careful.
I will check it out, and try to scare them.
Riley met a hot guy at the club last night.
Really? What about you?
Are you serious, you know I have a boyfriend.
Yes ,but it's still nice to meet handsome men, right.
You are not wrong on this. I'm so happy for her though. He seemed nice.
Well wish her luck. I hope they start dating.
So who did you meet tonight at the club, Riley?
There was a really cute guy at the bar, and I got his number!
I told you that you would find someone tonight.
I know I was just so nervous after not dating anyone for years,
You look amazing yourself so it won't be that hard.
Oh stop it, you look way better than me.
I've been studying and feel ready for the test. I don't know why I feel so overwhelmed.
Are you working and taking classes?
Yeah. I've been working too.
Maybe you should slow down, and not work during the school year.
You know I need the money. I have to work. I'll feel better once I've taken my exams.
Let's plan to go away for a few days when you've finished your exams.
I am feeling overwhelmed. There's so much I need to study for.
When is the final?
It's next week, but I also work full time.  If I don't help out and make some money, we'll get evicted.
That's a lot of stress on you.
It is and I am running on four hours of sleep each night.
This is not good, did you speak to your parents about it?.
I spent so much time online.
You know it's Spring and all the flowers are in bloom
I am sure it's winter.
This is because you spend all your life inside.
You are right, I need to go out. I need some exercise.
And a better food.
Have I told you about the crazy daydreams I've had lately?
Not that I remember. I hardly ever dream when I take a nap.
Same here, but I just had one during my nap about chasing rainbows!
That actually sounds pretty amazing! Were you able to catch them?
No, it went just about as well as you'd think. I kept getting close to them but they'd just move.
Still sounds like some good afternoon entertainment though!
It is so nice to relax on these lazy Sunday afternoons
It really is
I have had some crazy dreams too
What did you dream about ?
My last dream was most recently about chasing rainbows
That sounds really magical, I like it !
You know what I enjoy?
What is that?
I like day dreaming on lazy Sundays. This one time, I created a fantasy about trying to catch rainbows.
That sounds colorful.
Funny, I see what you did there.
I was babysitting my niece, she wanted to stay up late.
That's pretty normal for a kid her age.
Well, yeah, but her parents were counting on me to get her to bed early.
So, what did you end up doing?
I persuaded her to go to bed on time.
How responsible!
I'm going to be a good uncle, and make sure she gets some good sleep tonight
I'm sure your sister will really appreciate the baby being asleep when she gets home
She was been working overtime and she needed a day off to enjoy her time off
the baby looks so happy when he's sleeping and he makes that face
he is such a little cute baby
My sister asked me to babysit my niece!
Your niece?  I she the cute girl we saw yesterday?
Yes! she is so gentle I put her to bed at her normal bedtime
Ohh! she is a sleeping beauty.
Thanks!
I can't wait for this weekend
What are you doing this weekend?
We're going camping this weekend remember?
Oh yea, thanks for the reminder. What are we doing again?
First we are going to hike to the camp spot. Then set up. And fish till nightfall.
I cant wait.
I feel very peaceful when I'm in nature.
I love the outdoors, too.
All my life I've felt cramped up, when I'm stuck indoors in an office all day.
I agree that nature is much more freeing and relaxing than being indoors!
That's why I've spent my whole adult life hiking, fishing, and camping whenever I get the chance.
We should go for a hike together sometime.
It was freezing cold today.
Did you manage to stay inside?
No, I had to go out to run some errands.
That must have been really brutal.
I was with Quinn, I had to wrap his arms around me to stay warm.
Quinn must have been very cold too.
I cannot believe how cold it is outside in September!
Really? I don't think it is cold at all.
Well you must be a special kind of person because I am shivering!
Is there anything I can do for you to warm you up?
Yep, let me show you, give me your arm!
Ha, you could have just asked me to wrap my arms around you of doing it like that!
So I started getting really cold and I didn't have a heavier jacket.
Okay, I think I'm starting to see where this is going.
And Quinn was standing right behind me, so I just reached for him.
Okay, very smooth move on your part.
Thank you. And before you know it, he had his arms wrapped around me. Keeping me warm.
That is the perfect way to take advantage of an opportunity. I'm impressed by you!
It is so cold outside.
Look Remy is outside!
Ohhh! she is catching cold.
Can you go out and warm her up.
Ok! I will have to wrap my arms around her!
I published a new article in the newspaper.
What's the article about?
I gave the readers a thorough analysis of Riley's perspective.
That sounds great! I'll pick up a newspaper before work.
I finished my article this morning, Riley. I think you'll enjoy it.
Oh congratulations! I can't wait to read it.
I really gave an in depth and thorough analysis of your perspective.
Thanks, I really appreciate that. Nobody else seems to understand.
I hope they will, once they read the article.
That's what I'm hoping, as well!
Look at my torn up leg!
Oh that looks terrible! How did you injure it?
I was riding my bike and hit a pothole. It threw me off my bike.
That does look bad, but at least it wasn't way worse than that.
I suppose you are right. I could have torn up my face!
Definitely could have been worse!
I hope you enjoyed your birthday lunch.
I do! Thank you so much for this wonderful treat! It is such a surprise!
You are welcome. It is the least I can do for a special friend like you.
This is so much fun! I wish I had a birthday every month.
That's too much! I don't think I can afford to treat you every month.
Then it will be my treat next month. I'm loving this!
Are you guys ready to go home now?
Not really, but since our food has been ate and tokens are gone, I think we shall go!
Sounds good to me, did you guys have fun?
Yes. We did! Thank you so much! I didn't expect to be taken out for my birthday!
You are so very welcome! I am glad that I was able to do it!
Me too, we had a lot of fun Skylar! Thank you!
Do you want to go out to lunch for your birthday,  to a  really good time.
That sounds like a fun time. Where do you plan to go?
How about his new restaurant that opened up near our job.
Yes sure?
They serve nice food and sometimes we get free cakes as dessert, as well
That sounds like a restaurant I would enjoy.
Surprise!!! We have been waiting for you for years!!
Wow, Quince. This is so beautiful.
We wanted to make you feel at home again. We had so much fun putting up the American Flags and all the decorations.
Aw epic, we really feel at home. Where's the burgers, fries, apple pie, hot dogs, baseball, football, and the drinks!!
You've been gone awhile. We only eat vegan dishes, tofu burgers, gluten free pasta, and plant based salmon dogs. No drinks, except for water and home squeezed juice. Spring water maybe red wine.
Oh, I guess I feel like I am back in Europe.
When I ran into Ash he looked like he had seen a ghost.
Oh really, what happened?
I had to sit him down, and help him calm down. He could hardly speak.
That's terrible! Did you manage to ask him what happened?
Well, he was shaking a lot but he managed to tell me that he lost the case.
That's awful to hear. I'll have to give Ash a call.
We won a storage unit at the auction yesterday.
Oh, that sounds like fun.
It was. There was this antique looking item that I had to take get checked out.
Ooh, was it worth it?
Yes, I ended up selling it to the person who checked it out for $10,000 and I only paid $700 for the unit.
That's unbelievable. Congratulations!
Check out this sword I just found at a garage sale.
Wow that looks awesome.
It'll make a fine addition to my collection.
Does that serial number look a little odd?
Oh no, I'd better have it checked out by someone.
I think someone sold you a fake.
I'm really interested in buying this toy for my collection. What do you think?
I think it's great. But why are you asking me?
You have a big toy collection as well. I would think you'd be a good person to ask.
Model airplanes are not really toys.
I play with them just like toys all the time when you're not looking.
I might have to stop inviting you over.,
Gosh it's hot in here, isn't it?
It sure it! Should we turn the AC on or just take our hoodies off?
I advise us to take our cloaks off and place them on the throne like in Games of Thrones!
You are so intelligent and creative! That is a great idea!
Well, I have always wanted to be an actress!
This is a good start! You got this down pat!
It was so hot the other day
Yeah, this heat wave has been really intense
I only had like two layers on, but I was going to overheat, if I didn't lose one
I can't believe you had two in the first place!
Yeah I don't know what I was thinking, but I felt much better after that
Oh I bet! I'm glad you didn't get too hot
It is so hot here, I've got to take off my cloak.
Are you just going to leave it here in the forest?
No, I'm taking it back to the castle to leave on the throne.
well, won't the evil queen know you've been here, if you do that?
That's the whole idea. I want to keep her on her toes.
You are great at playing this game.
I thought today would never end. It felt like the longest day ever!
How bizarre, I was thinking just the opposite.
I dislike everything about today. I just want to eat popcorn and watch a movie or something.
That sounds good. Why don't we just do that.
I supposed you are right. It will get my mind off work.
I an so tired and hungry. I just got home after being at work since 6 am.
That is a long day. You need a rest.
Yes , I am going to get a glass of wine and make a pizza.
That sounds really nice . Have fun.
Hi, good to see you.
I've been sitting on the porch for an hour.  You said we'd watch the game together.
Sorry, it was a long day at work.  I wasn't expecting overtime.
Let's get inside before we miss anymore.
Grab a beer from the fridge and start watching.  I'm getting changed.
Well, hurry it up.  The team needs our support.
I am selling this brown couch to my new neighbors.
That's a cute couch. Why would you want to sell it?
I plan buy a new one - more comfortable one.
Here comes your dog. It seems the dog likes the couch too. Is it peeing?
Oh no. It's peeing on the couch. I will take care of it right away.
I think it's fine. The odor is gone. You did a good job.
I can smell some odor on the couch!
Your Dog peed right!
Yes, looks like it, I need to remove the odor as soon as possible
Need a hand?.
The guy was coming to pick up the couch and Roxy peed on it!
Oh my God! What did you do, did you kill her? They have that spray at the store the store that will take the smell out.
Yeah, I went and bought some. The guy never knew. Paid me 200 for it.
You should always keep some pee away around to take out the smell.
I can't believe the dog chose this morning to pee on the couch.
Yeah, that is a genuine example of bad timing.
I had to scramble to get the smell out of it before the guy who wanted to buy it showed up.
So did he end up buying it?
He told me on the phone that he was going to. But ultimately he decided not to. He said it had a bad odor.
I see. Guess the smell didn't come all the way out. That's too bad.
When I saw the price of the laptop I wanted, I started to think about other options.
Did you end up getting the one you wanted or a different one.
I actually still haven't decided.  I really want the Microsoft one, but it's so expensive.
I've heard it's really good, but there are lots of other options.
I know.  I'm going to think about it some more and decide by tomorrow.
I really like this laptop.  It has everything I want, the perfect screen size, plenty of RAM, eight cores....
Yeah, it's awesome, but take a look at that price tag.
How much is it? Oh no, I can't afford this!  I could buy a cheap used car for that price!
You sure could.  Or you could buy almost the same laptop with even more RAM from a different brand and have enough left over to buy a second one.
Yeah, I think I need to compare a couple more choices, before I decide on buying one or the other.
If you like, I am happy to help.  I love looking around this store.
I've been learning German on YouTube to get ready for my trip to Germany.
This sounds good, it is nice if you know the language when you go there.
yeah, I didn't want to get there and not be able to talk to anyone!!
I understand - I think it's really hard to be somewhere and not be able to communicate.
that's exactly why I, did it. I can't imagine needing to ask someone something, and not be able to.
Right, that would be very frustrating. Or if you had an emergency.
I will be travelling to Germany in summer.
Are you fluent in German?
No, but we can learn on YouTube.
This will allow us communicate with the natives with ease.
I find it nice to learn using YouTube all words are well elaborated.
Its a nice experience though challenging at the start.
My family is taking all of us to Germany, for our vacation in two weeks.
This sounds nice! I've never been out of the country.
Me neither. I've learned how to speak German on YouTube.
That's pretty smart of you.
Thanks! I want to be able to talk to cute German boys.
Oh Skylar, this is so cute!
I've been teaching for over twenty years now. It's strange to think that I won't be soon.  I brought my students together to tell them I was retiring after this school year.
How did they respond?
They told me what a great teacher I am, and that they would miss me.
Kids can be so sweet.
I love my kids.  I will miss them very much.
You care so much about your students, and they really appreciate it.
Let's make a go away party.
Should we order something?
I will order a large cake.
Okay, I will tell them to fix the entire office.
Hey, can you help me with this cake.
Sure. Let me handle that.
I just got a call about the cake, I ordered.
Is it for the going away party at work?
Yes, the whole office will be there so I ordered a large cake.
How are you going to get the cake up to the office?
I sent my assistant to help with that.
Make sure to save me a slice, please.
I'm really excited for this go away party.
Me, too? What have you prepared for the party?
I ordered a large cake.
That's awesome! Was it delivered?
No, but I sent my assistant in to help.
It should be here soon, I am sure
The cake is around, have sent my assistant to help.
Oh, the party is gonna be epic.
Yeah, I just wished the co worker best of luck.
Same here
I think he's back.
Okay, let's go.
I'd like to talk to you both.
Oh ok.
I noticed during the exam, that you two were communicating, when you weren't supposed to be.
I am sorry
I'm going to have to give you guys an F on this one. I can't tolerate cheating.
We understood, we're very sorry about it and won't do it again.
Today I gave three different students an F on an exam because they were cheating with their phones.
Wow, do you ever feel bad if you have to do that?
In this case not really, because these students never put the effort forth in class.
I don't understand why people think it is ok to cheat, when you can just study.
I know, and the material wasn't that hard either.
I hope those kids learned their lesson that cheating is never ok.
I caught two of my students cheating together on an exam last week.
How'd you catch them?
They were so obvious!  I think each of them had studied half the material and they were passing notes to one another with answers they knew on them.  I caught them passing a note.
So what did you do?
I gave them both Fs on the exam and sent them out of the room.  I am going to give them a chance, but the best they can do now, is a C in the class.
Hopefully they will have learned something from this.
I'm just trying to get organized for my class.
How is the teaching job going?
I didn't realize it would be so hard, but it helps to organize my folders by subject.
Hopefully it will get easier for you in class.
It will as long as the kids behave.
Elementary school kids do not like to sit still.
I need my things organized for the classroom.
Do you have a specific technique?
Yes, I generally classify my folders by subject.
That is a good idea.
I've always wanted to be an organized instructor.
Well, I think you're doing a great job.
I decided I needed to be more organized this year.
Yeah, last year you were a hot mess.
I know! I was so stressed, and just couldn't get it together.
I like your new system. It should work well.
It's already helped me get things done faster.
I guess you don't have to spend as much time searching for teaching material.
Wow, this is a tight gap.
Ha, you barely fit in!
It could make a cool photo.
I can take one.
Awesome, take one with me facing forward and one sideways.
Okay, forward first then sideways.
So I decided to stand in between two really close together buildings to hide from the cops.
Why did you even decide to run?
I didn't deserve to go to jail and I found a really good place to hide.
Do you think they will get you eventually?
No, I don't think they saw my face at all.
Well I really hope they don't find you.
Hey I did something really stupid the other day. I stood in this tiny narrow space between 2 buildings.
Weren't you afraid of getting stuck?
Nope. Didn't even think about it.
Well, you need to be careful, it can be very dangerous and can cause bad injuries.
Didn't think about that happening.
Exactly. You've got to look out for yourself. Don't be so reckless all the time.
I just gave Casey the report on the team.
The team at work that's doing the new business project?
Yeah. He's been working hard as the leader so I just did what I could to help.
He should be thankful he has you as part of his team.
Hopefully he puts in a good word for me, the next time I ask for a raise with the bosses.
I hope so. You really deserve it.
It's so hot here in Dallas. I heard it was 100 degrees at noon.
Yeah, Texas is a hot state. Did you bring summer clothes?
I packed some, but I'm used to 70 degree summer weather up north.
Maybe you should buy some nee clothes and get into an air conditioned building.
That's a good idea.
Hey what 's up? I'm at my mom's house in Dallas.
How is it over there?
it is really hot, a hundred degrees at noon and supposed to go up to 105 by 1:30.
That's is hot, I prefer the cold, this is why I live in Alaska, to avoid the heat.
What's the temperature there?
A nice cool 62.
I had a great time in Dallas, but it was really hot.
Yeah, Texas is a hot state.
I knew it would be hot. But at noon it was 100 degrees.
That sounds about right. It's basically a desert.
The Lone Star State is a frying pan.
Doesn't sound like you intend to go back there.
I love visiting you, Lisa.
I love when you visit me too. I just wish it was not 100 degrees right now.
Seriously, it's like it just had to be that hot during my visit?
Well at least most buildings here have air conditioning.
That is true.
We can spend most of the day at the pool to cool off.
I've forgotten how hot it was in Dallas!
That's what happens when you visit Texas in the middle of summer.
It's one hundred degrees outside!
It is best if we go inside and cool off.
That was a fun and adventure week we had.
Yes, I never knew kayaking was so much fun.
My adrenaline pumped every time we went out.
So thrilling, it was. We should plan another trip soon.
Our plan really worked out well, I really should plan another one.
Great! Don't forget to give me a heads up. Thank you again for a wonderful week by the river!
My dog seemed like he was waiting for food last night.
He must have been hungry.
I gave him some food and he ate it, so I suppose he was.
What did you give him the food in?
Just a bowl.
That was probably smart.
My dog seems to be hungry.  I can tell because he was following me around with this sad look in his eyes.  I filled up his bowl and left it by the door for him.
You are so good with dogs.
I have grown up with them.  Dogs were always part of my family.
It really helps kids to be raised with animals.
My dogs have helped me through a lot of bad times.
I get it.  Sometimes I feel like my dog is the only one who understands me.
My dog is diabetic and she can only eat special food two times a day.
Poor doggy! Doe sit work out to be expensive.
Well, between food, insulin, syringes and doctor's visits we drop $300 a month.
So, what do you do if she gets hungry between meals?
Well, she gets one or two of her special treats.
I see
My dog was so hungry last night.  When I went to feed him, I realized I was out of dog food.
So what did you feed him?
He struck gold.  I had half a roast chicken in the refrigerator so I put that in his bowl and gave it to him.
I bet he was happy with that.
I've never seen him eat so fast before.
Hey, you know that new guy, Austin, at work?
Yes, I have seen him around this week.  He does not talk much.
I've been making fun of him so much around the office, his sister told me that now he hates going into work because of me.
Oh really? I feel bad for him!
Today I'm going to pick on him about his haircut, his Texas accent, and his dumb shoes.
Just leave him alone, everyone is different and he deserved to be himself!
This guy, Austin, at work is a real character.
I hear you make fun of him a lot.
Yeah, I think I'm really getting on his nerves.
What did you do to him?
He is psycho.
Just get to know him first before you judge him.
What time is it?
It's almost 3 in the afternoon. Why are you still here Cameron? Don't you have to be at work.
I don't feel like going today.
May I ask why?
My boss at work keeps making fun of me.
I am sorry to here this, don't let that get you down. Is there anything I can do to help.
I went to the baseball game with Ash yesterday. It was pretty fun.
Was it good? Did the Yankees win?
Of course. But I was starving, and at halftime Ash went to grab us a couple of hot dogs.
Baseball game hot dogs are the best.
Yeah, except we didn't get a chance to eat them because Ash dropped them both on the way back to our seats!
Oh, no! That must have been embarrassing. Well, that's our Ash.
I really screwed up yesterday.
Weren't you on that date with Jordan?
Yeah, I bought us each a hotdog, but on the way back, I dropped them.
That's embarrassing!
Yeah, I had to go back and buy more.
This things happened to all of us, so don't worry too much!
Aubrey and I are having an argument.
I am sorry to hear this, what happened? I hope everything is alright
She was so nice to keep cool for my sake.
That was nice of her. She loves you.
I realize that now.
You have found a true friend.
Hi, hope your day was good. Aubrey spent the day with me. She kept saying annoying stuff, but finally started doing the right thing.
What kind of stuff did she say?
Well, she kept talking about how her clothes and shoes were nicer than mine and some other things, too.
This is not very nice of her. Did she realized that this upsets you?
Yeah, she finally could tell that she was getting on my last nerve, and she started being much nicer.
Glad that happened. You have been friends with Aubrey forever.
Let's go to the park.
I came over so you and I could study together.
I know, but I don't feel like studying for the test. I want to go for a walk in thw park
We need to study first, and then we can go to the park.
Yes I supposed you are right, neither one of us can afford to fail this test.
I just got back from a great vacation!
Where did you go?
I had never been to the shore, so we went to the beach!
You had never been to the beach?
Nope! It was amazing to see the ocean!
I bet it was. It sounds like you had a great time.
I'm so excited to see the shore.
Let's go to the beach then.
I've never seen that before.
so happy you  are exciting.
Yes I am.
I can see, that you can't wait.
I saw the ocean for the first time.
You've really never seen the ocean before?
No I never did. It is sad that it was on a short vacation.
You've never been to the beach, even as a child?
I might have before, but I can't remember.
I think you must have. Your hometown's less than fifty miles away from the Atlantic.
This is a little crazy.
Tell me.
I've never been to the shore.
Really?
Yeah, so I felt happy to see the ocean for the first time while I was on vacation.
That's good, so happy you had a good time.
Addison, I don't know if I will graduate on time.
Did you study for the exams?
I did, but I struggle with this subject.
Here is the answer.
Thank you so much. I don't know how I can repay you back.
My pleasure, always good to help each other.
I would not be graduating, if it were not for Addison. She gave me the answers to that test.
Cheating is really bad, but I understand why you had to do it.
I feel badly , too, but I am not going to go to summer school to improve my skills.
Yes, this sounds good, I am sure it will be good .
Thank you for helping me out, so that I could graduate
it would be sad you couldn't graduate just because you didn't have the right answer
well, the test does make up for 75 percent of our grade, so it is important
I'm glad that you were able to make it through
lets go get some food to celebrate.
I'm so lucky to have a friend like Addison.
Why?
Well, if not for her, I wouldn't have been able to graduate. She gave me the answer to the exam that my whole grade hung upon.
This is nice of her, to help you
Look! I have a new puppy!
She is so adorable. Where did you get her from?
From the animal shelter. She was so cute, I couldn't leave without her in my arms.
How much did you paid for her?
They only charge me for re-homing fee
I wonder if they have more. I'd like to get her brothers, so they can play together every time we meet.
Have I showed you the new friend I got yet?
No, you did not, can we meet them?
I got a new puppy from the shelter!
Aw, how cute, I can't wait to see them!
Sure let's go to the backyard and I will show you.
Oh, I cannot wait! I love dogs!
I'll make the dough
I'll get the sauce ready for the perogi.
Did anyone bring alcohol?
I do have wine!
Excellent what kind?
I have red wine!
Earlier today we started on our famous perogi.
Oh yeah? What part of the recipe did you do?
I made the dough; I'm very good at that.
Yes, you are. I love your breads!
You'll need to stop by and sample the perogi.
Thank you so much. I'll come by after work with my best hearty appetite.
I'm about to make a perogi.  Do you want one?
Do you have enough dough?
Sure,  I have a ton ready.
I'll take one then!
I hope you are hungry, I love making perogi.
You are a great cook.
Lee's son is really a talented painter. I saw one of his paintings today.
I didn't even know he painted.
You should go over and see them. I told him today to never stop because he's got a gift.
Wow, that's high praise. I'll get a hold of Lee and go to take a look.
I think Lee's son is going to be a good artist.
You saw some of his work?
Yeah, I saw one of his paintings and it is wonderful.
I had no idea his son was good at art.
He is incredible, I am sure he's going to get better as he ages.
Looks like Lee might have an artist in the family.
Lee's son is such an amazing artist.
How do you know that?
 I saw his first painting and it was incredible.
Maybe he's an artistic genius.
His son deserves all the praise for that painting, he did a wonderful job, simply amazing.
Well, I am impressed and really exciting to see the painting now.
I finally saw your sons first painting the other day!
What did you think of it?
It was magnificent! He has a special talent!
Thanks, he really works hard at it!
please tell him, that I said, that he did a great job!
I can't believe how much work was left for me. I'm exhausted.
Well I'm glad you called me. Seems like it has been forever.
It's only been two weeks and you know I miss talking to you.
I miss you, too. When can we get together?
Work will be busy like this for the next few weeks. I promise we will get together soon.
I'm holding you to that. I miss you.
I had a very busy day at work.
Did you get your work done?
I did manage to get them sorted.
Do you have any time for yourself?
Only after all was done. I had a few moment to catch up with a friend.
Make sure you look after yourself.
Hi , how's your day going?
It's almost done, its eight o'clock at night.
Eight o'clock already!  I have been busy all day and lost track of time.
I bet, I called you at like ten o'clock this morning.
I had three conference calls, three meetings, a site survey, and I had to work on two presentations for next week.  I am still at work now.
It is late, go home now.  Call me tomorrow if its not too busy at work.
I am so glad I got to call you.
I've been waiting all day.
I was so busy today, as well. I just now got the chance to make  a call now.
How have you been?
I've been doing alright and yourself?
Just studying and working, living the life of a poor student.
I got a membership to the gym last month
What did you get the membership for?
I wanted to learn how to swim.
I thought you already knew how to swim?
No, that is why I would not go into the deep in of the pool.
Well now that you have learn to swim, you can teach me.
I'm so happy I got a membership at the gym!
That's awesome. What's your favorite machine?
Actually, it's not a machine. It's the pool!
Awesome. Are you doing water aerobics?
Sort of. I took swimming lessons from a coach and learned to swim!
That's awesome! You have got to go with us to the lake this summer!
I'm glad I joined this gym.
What kind of workouts do you do?
I'm taking swimming lessons.
Are they helpful?
I can pretty much swim now.
Maybe I'll sign up, too.
You know last month I paid for a year long membership at the gym.
I used to go to that gym as well.
I really went for the swimming lessons that they offer.
I didn't know you were not able to swim?
Well, now I can, as I have taken swim lessons every day.
That's great to hear and hope we can go to the beach to swim together soon!
I lied to Mr Smith so I could skip class these past months
I noticed you had been missing for a few days
I had to get some medical procedures done and wasn't able to do both
you should talk to him so you don't get expelled
I supposed that's a good idea
What's is going on Cam?
Just watching the game and having a beer.
I need to get a beer and a hotdog.
The beer guy is right over there.
Do you need another? I'm buying.
Thank you so much, I love to have another beer.
Hey Cameron! I didn't know that you came to these sporting events.
I normally don't, but I knew you would be here!
Is that why you came, and why you waved for me to come join you up here?
Yes, I enjoy your company, you make me laugh!
Well I am glad that I can make someone laugh these days!
You are always a great companion! Don't forget that!
I'm fishing right now but nothing caught.
Use live bait.
Okay do you have worms.
Yea they are so gross.
So gross but it works.
I have spray too.
I just got home from fishing. I didn't catch a darn thing.
It sounds relaxing, though. Where did you go?
I was just pier fishing off the dock.
I love doing that. I haven't done it in years.
You should go with me sometime.
Thanks, I will. Let me know the next time you go.
I went fishing yesterday.
Did you catch anything?
I caught anything and everything, bass, trout, you name it.
Where do you fish?
Down by the pier.
Oh yeah that's a good spot.
So I was out fishing this morning by the dock.
That sounds exciting! Tell me how it went.
Usually fishing is a lot of fun and relaxing but today wasn't my best day. Today's weather is not ideal for catching a lot of fish.
I'm sorry to hear about that. But at least you tried your best and that's something you can hang your hat on.
I like to catch some of the salmon, trout and bass as fresh fish tastes really good when cooking. But today was just one of those days. I couldn't catch anything at all.
It was pretty cool today and that might be a part of it. Friday's forecast is considerably better so you might have some better luck then.
I feel like I'm getting into an echo chamber lately. I'm only talking to people who already agree with me.
I've noticed that happening too. You're getting a little narrow-minded about issues.
I only know how to say things a certain way over and over again, so it's hard for me to talk to new people about these subjects.
Keep trying to reach out. The more variety of arguments you hear, the better your own will become.
My abilities with this language are very limited.
At least you're trying.
Yeah, a lot of people aren't even given it a chance right now.
It seems like the same thing can be applied to other parts of their lives.
It's sad that people just like to stay in that small bubble.
We need to expand our horizons in order to appreciate the world we live in.
I feel that I looked too plain.
aw, that color suits you.
Thank you, I want o too a bit more colorful, so I dyed my hair with bright red and highlights.
You don't look plain anymore.
I love my new style.
I will also dye my hair.
I probably shouldn't have kicked the ball so hard
I think when you kicked it, it put a spin on it
I seen that in a soccer movie a few years ago
yes, you probably should have taken your time and aimed a little better
Yesterday's football game was really a downer.
What happened?
Well, in the last few minutes of the game I tried to make a field goal and it hit the pole and bounced out!
That's awful. Did the coach yell at you?
Yes. He made me do 100 pushups after the game, too.
That's harsh.
I had some really bad luck in the football game.
I didn't see the game.
I took a shot on goal and tried to score.
Did something go wrong with your shot?
The ball hit a pole and bounced back from the goal.
That is bad luck.
OK guys if you could please quiet down.
Nah, we won't! First day of class! Let's start a riot!
Very well then! Whichever student is the first to be quiet gets no homework for a month.
Wow! You've got a deal.
I thought so.
This Mr. Bailey sure knows his stuff.
The new kids in my class have settled down!
How did you get them to stop acting out?
I just tricked them into thinking that I give them less material to study if they are doing well.
ANd it works?
Yes, if they work harder at lessons, there is less material for them to take home to learn .
I drove here today because I finally got my new license!
Congratulations. I didn't know you had a car.
I got the old family car from my dad for now.
He's giving it to you?
He said I can share it with my brother as long as we take care of the mechanical work.
That's going to be so free feeling, to finally be driving a car.
Guess what I got? My license! Look out world, I'm legal
Finally, I bet you are so glad you don't have to get rides from mom anymore!
I bet moms glad, too ,haha, I can't wait to drive everywhere!
You better fill up that gas tank, haha
It's full, let's go for a ride, I need to drive this car!
Let's go!
Finally passed my driving test.
That's great news! Now you can drive me around.
Yes, we can hang out in my new car. Driving still makes me nervous though.
One day, it will be instinctive and you will relax a little.
Let's go to the beach later. I'm driving!
Yes, I'm so bored. Now we can have some fun!
I really love doing my part to help the environment.
What are some of the things you do?
One of the things I do is hardly driving my car to work.
Is that tiring for you to walk to work?
I don't walk to work. I just get a ride from one of my friends.
That's actually smart.
Try to help the environment as much as I can.
I would love to help. Where do I start?
For one, I hardly drive my car to work, to prevent pollution.
How do you get to work?
I ride my bike. I also use it as an exercise so I can be healthier.
That is a great way to save the earth, and at the same time yourself.
I just really think everyone should do their part for the environment.
I agree, we only have one planet.
I don't even drive to work most days. I'll take the bus.
Then why have a car and pay a note and insurance?
I like to drive to the woods on the weekends.
Then doesn't that just use the same amount of gas as if you had gone to work in your car?
I broke my ankle the other day.
What happened?
I was playing frisbee with Ash's dad. He also broken his ankle.
How awful! How are you feeling now?
I'm feeling better now compared to the other day.
Glad to hear. Hopefully you recover soon.
I am so clumsy and broke my ankle!
How did you break your ankle?
I was just playing frisbee with Ash's dad and I tripped and fell while I was running.
If you need me to help you with anything just let me know.
Thanks, I am going to stay with my parents for the next few weeks so I don't have to climb up the stairs.
You are lucky that they have a ranch cluster home.
Frisbee was so much fun until something bad happened
yeah these things happen.  I just hope my ankle will recover soon because I cant get disability checks forever
Of course.  You know I think that it is a smart idea to be really careful next time
I will be.  I am not in the best shape and it is really important I stay fit and active
yeah.  its going to be a lot of therapy to rehabilitate that ankle, but it will be worth it in the end
indeed it will be. Thank you.
I really kicked butt today at the swimming competition!
Oh that's great! Who did you race?
I raced Remy. I blew him away.
Wow! How did you get so fast?
I practiced really hard this month. I was super motivated.
Then you deserved to win! Good job!
I can't believe we won.
Great job!
Yeah, I practiced so hard I knew I'd do okay.
Who else competed?
Remy and I beat him!
Awesome! Keep up the good work.
I was so excited when I won that race. I had practice so hard and work to every day to make sure that I won.
Yea you blew Remy out of the water you where like a whole person ahead of him.
Thanks, all due to hard work and dedication.
Yes, I can see that it paid off nice job, Sasha.
I practiced so hard, and I beat Remy at the competition!!
Oh that's awesome, I'm so proud of you.
Thank you. i'm so glad that all of my practicing paid off.
It's always nice when you put a lot of work into something, and you see the rewards from it.
Exactly. I pushed myself so much, so it's so nice to now be rewarded for all of that hard work.
Well, I'm really proud of you. Nice job.
Well, I can't dwell on the situation anymore.
I agree, Kai. You have to face and deal with it.
Its not like its the end of the world anyway.
You'll get over it in time. Time heals all.
I can't run away anymore. Just need to dive in.
Wait ,what we're we deciding on again?
I've been out of surgery for hours, but it still hurts to move around.
The doctor said you'll need to rest for a few days before you're back to normal.
I can't do anything quickly. I can't even walk without moving slowly.
Watching you try to move around reminds me of watching my grandparents.
Ha-ha, very funny.
I had a major operation.
wow, what really happened
I got diabetes and just got out of surgery.
I hope it went well
yes, I was told not to pull off any scabs as they protect it for reopening
sure as removing them could actually cause you slow to move
Wow, I am so glad you were around yesterday to help me.
Yeah that surgery really took a lot out of you!
They gave me the good drugs so I was so slow all day.
Well, you know you can always call me to help.
I know, thanks for being a good friend.
Any time!
I am having a hard time moving so bear with me.
What happened?  Did you hurt yourself?
I just got out of surgery on my foot.
You should rest then.  Give your body time to recover.
I know but I need to get things done.
What do you need to get done?  I can help you.
I can't believe I got a text today. Guess who it was from.
Your crush, Ann?
Yes and she asked us to go out to dinner.
Did you accept it?
Of course, I just took a shower and got ready for the date.
I'm so happy for you. Have a good evening.
Sure, I'll go to dinner with you. But I need to shower first
Great, how about going for Italian at La Mela if that's alright?
That works with me
Cool! 7pm alright?
Yes, that's fine. See you then!
I'll pick you up at your place. See you in a bit
Hey I'm just getting ready to go on my date, today.
Oh really? You mean that girl from the other day.
Yeah. I just got a text from her to go out for dinner.
Nice! what restaurant are you going to?
I picked out a fancy restaurant, maybe I should've picked a more normal restaurant?
No. I think she will be impressed.
I met Austin's father the other day.
Where did you meet him?
Well, after Austin proposed, we went to his father's so I could meet him.
Congratulations on your engagement? Did you like your new father in law?
Thank you! I did, we got along well. He loves to fish.
You like to fish as well, you will have a great time together!
He gave me a ring.
He gave you an engagement ring?
He proposed to me, too.
He asked you to marry him?
He took me to Chicago and I came to meet his father at his house.
I guess this is the real deal then.
Of course I will marry you Austin!
I am so happy you said yes. Now you have to meet my dad!
I can't wait to meet him!
This is my Dad, Tracy! Dad, this is Tracey.
Hi! I have heard so much about you.
I told Remy I blacked out last night from drinking too much, and she's very worried about me.
Why is she worried?
I black out quick often from drinking.  She thinks I have a problem.
You mean like an alcohol problem.
Addiction runs in my family so I wouldn't be surprise.
Maybe you should see a doctor to ask for help to control it?
Do you remember what happen to you guys last night.
Not really, I just remember drinking and then its blank.
Yes, you guys had way too much to drink, then you all just blacked out.
I can't remember a think from last night.
I was worried,  I didn't know what to do initially.
Thank you for taking care of me, when I was out.
O.K. Remy, here's what happened after you blacked out from drinking too much.
I don't think I want to know all the details.
Oh, it's nothing about you; just about what you missed.
Alright, what did I miss?.
Jennifer danced on a table until she fell on her rear.  Bob jumped in the pool with his clothes on and Bill poured ketchup on his head and claimed he was injured...
Oh wow, that's enough.  My head hurts from laughing.
I completely lost my entire investment, because you told me to put it in a company that was failing.
I didn't know it was failing, that isn't what my stock broker told me!
Well, you need a different broker because that made me lose over $100.
I invested in the same company and I lost double that much, so sorry about this.
We learn from that and I should have done my own research .
Well I mean it could have been worse I guess.
Lately, I've been feeling down.
What happened?
I took some bad investment advice from a friend and lost every cent.
Sorry to hear that.
I might take some time to reflect.
Hopefully everything works out.
My friend recommended a stock and I put all my money in it, and I lost every cent.
Oh, no.  So you invested all your money?
Yeah, he said it was a sure thing.
Are you going to have to move back in with your parents?
Yeah, I am until I am able to save up enough to get another apartment.
Be more cautious when you invest.
there was so much traffic
where did you go?
I went to the store
what'd you buy?
just some milk for my cereal
oh, that sucks that there was so much traffic
Funny running into you here so early! How have you been?
Hey Jan! I have been good! Just needed to get some eggs.
I wish I could eat eggs, but my body doesn't like them!
I am sorry to hear this!
I will stick with grabbing some milk so I can enjoy my cereal!
Well as long as you have a plan and something to eat!
I just got done with a huge grocery store trip.
What are all those bags filled with? They look heavy.
It's all milk!
Why would you buy so much milk?
I eat a ton of cereal every morning. This will only last me a few days, believe it or not.
Why can't I go outside?
Because it is raining outside.
Why can't I just play in the rain?
Because it is chilly out and you might catch a cold.
Why would I catch a cold?
You are driving me crazy!  Just stop with the questions!
Oh God my hair is itching.
Let me take a look at your scalp. Is it burning?
Yes. It hurts. Ever since we came back from camping.
Oh I see the problem. You have lice Riley. You must have picked them up on the camping trip.
Well, I cut off all my hair now.
That should cure the problem. Just remember to change your linen for the next few days.
I came home and I have lice.
Oh wow that sucks.
I had to shave my hair.
Yea that's a good idea.
Do you have clippers.
Yea that's the way to go.
I played football with Jesse.
Did you have a good time?
Jesse got hurt on the very first play.
How bad was his injury?
I had to kneel down next to him because he could not get up.
That sounds as if he was seriously injured.
So this morning this fly was buzzing around my head.
This sounds like an exciting story.
Anyway, I was so annoyed I smashed it with a stone.
As I say, an exciting story.
Well, in my fury to get the fly with the stone, in reality a big rock, I missed several times and damaged two pieces of furniture.
Wow, I hope it is not to bad.
Ugh, this fly keeps buzzing around my head. It's so annoying!
Now, it's flying around my head. Go away, fly!
Ah, now it's buzzing around me again! Where's the fly swatter?
I can't find the fly swatter, but here's a stone.
Wow, that worked!
Well, now you can enjoy your day without any buzzing.
I am so glad I was elected as class president.
We are so proud of you, what did you do for campaign?
I offered to change things and hanged posters all over school.
That sounds like a lot of hard work.
It was, but I am so happy it paid off.
And we are happy for you as well.
I cant believe I am about to be class president.  It is going to be nothing short of amazing
Tell us what you did to help yourself win
Well I had great advertising techniques.  I also went to see people who were former presidents, too
So you evaluated qualities of good candidates
Yes, I really did, it was worth it
It most definitely was
I told the people, who were at the book fair that Casey loved every single one of them.  Casey was busy signing her cook books.
She just published a cookbook.  I need to get my hands on a copy and have her sign it.
I have a copy here for you.
She's such a famous baker.  I used to buy all my baked good from her before she moved here business.
Her business is doing well,  she's selling a lot of cookbooks as well.
Everyone I know is buying her cookbooks for themselves and as gifts.
I was so sick and weak today, I'm glad Jan was there.
What did Jan do to help you?
I wanted to rest my forehead on a pillow and just couldn't do it, so Kendall put my head on the pillow.
I hope you're feeling better now.
I really wasn't feeling well yesterday
what were you feeling?
I just felt sick, but Jan helped me
So sorry to hear this. What did she do to help?
she let me rest my forehead on her nice pillow
that's really nice of her
I'm not really getting along well with anyone in the group
I have seen that you haven't even talked to anyone since last week
I think I am just going to do my own thing and hope for the best
Why don't you try to talk to them and make a decision after 
I did the report for the school.
Did you do how the school wanted it?
No, I did my own thing.
Won't this not cause confusion?
I wouldn't think so.
Okay.
I went bowling for the first time today.
How did it go? Did you win?
No,  but it was really fun.
As long as you had fun, that's all that matters.
Thanks! I had some difficulty with staying in the lane though.
That's difficult even for seasoned players.
This bowling thing isn't fun.
You haven't given it a chance.
I have trouble lifting the bowling ball to throw.
You don't throw it, you roll it.
That finally dawned on me when I eventually got the ball rolling down the lane toward the pins.
it's not good to use in basketball, either.
I was having so much trouble bowling.
Why is that? Have you played often.
I haven't played much and my aim was off.
Sometimes it's hard enough to pick up the ball.
I get it. It took me a while to even get it all the way down the lane, but I managed.
I'm glad that you were able to do it.
Okay, so I've got all the measurements down.
Will everything fit?
It should. I double-checked everything, and the joiner rechecked them too.
Didn't that make you feel bad? Like, he wasn't trusting you to give him the right measurements.
Nah, I appreciated it. I mean, he's making sure it gets done right, trying to make sure everything's correct.
I guess that's true. I'd still be a little offended though. You're too nice.
What is the best way to measure my kitchen?
You should use a tape measure and be sure to measure both the walls and the floors.
Alright, sounds good. Do you want the measurements in feet?
Yeah, feet would be best.
Alright, I have the measurements written down.
Thanks. We'll get your new kitchen fitted in no time.
I need to measure my kitchen walls and floor for a renovation project.
That is fantastic!
Let me do it now so I can give it to the joiner.
You must be so excited about it.
I will finally have my dream kitchen.
I am really happy for you.
We have worked so hard to get you to this point, Addison.
The illusion that you created for the last show, had everyone clapping.
I knew that if we could make all three of the men disappear, it would be a standing ovation.
You are the reason that I am going to be a Vegas header.
Thank you for giving me a chance to show you what I could do.
Thank you for making me a star!
I made up this elaborate illusion for Addison's act and it went very well.
So it was really your work that made her a star?
I mean I created it but she still has to perform it and make it look real.
I guess that is true, I just wish you had more recognition for what you do.
I really don't need it, I don't like the attention and that is why we get along so well.
That's good, I would probably get jealous at the attention she was getting.
How'd that illusion I made work for your act?
It went great! Everyone loved it!
That's awesome!
Yeah! I'm even booked for a few more acts, this is a huge moment for my career.
I'm so happy to hear about that!
I want to give you a bit of my profits, you were instrumental in this.
Hey, how are you?
I am not so bad, thank you. Carson said you were aces.
Oh probably because I gave him some Japanese candy I had.
aw, can I have a piece too?
sure!
Thanks!
I know you try to minimize the amount of eating your little boy does between meals. I hope it's okay that I gave him a little treat.
That's okay. You watched Carson for almost four hours while Sally and I were out shopping. What sort of treat did he have?
Last year, when I visited Tokyo I brought back a stash of Japanese candy. It's different, sweet, but also kind of spicy. I gave Carson a piece.
Did he like it?
Actually, he loved it!
Wow! Carson isn't usually a big sweets person. Maybe you'll let me try one.
You have got to try this treats I got from my trip to Japan.
What kind of treats?
Just a whole bunch of Japanese candy that I have stashed away.
How are they?
Well, I gave some to Carson. And he seems to really enjoy them
Can I try one.
Hey Carson, would you like a treat?
Sure, that sounds good.
I just got back from Japan and got these cool candies. Here you go.
Wow, these are great. Sour, but I like the taste.
I love Japan - the culture, people, everything.
Can you explain again how to get to the mall?
Go downtown. Pass the capitol then take the second right.
Thanks. That sounds simple enough.
What are you going to the mall for?
To get some stuff for my dad. I think I can remember the way now,  thanks for the help.
Just be careful Aubrey. We don't want you getting lost.
I think I remember how you told me to get to the mall.
Well I explained it pretty well.  And it isn't that hard to find.
Yeah I just need to take a left, then a right.  Then follow the signs.
Yep it is that easy.
Easy peezy.
The directions you gave me were so easy to follow
I wrote them out for my mom as welly
it only took me about ten minutes to get there with all the traffic
wow, that is so fast. was their noone on the street at all?
didn't seem like it
I decided to ask Kendall to marry me.
Really? You guys haven't even been dating that long.
That probably explains why Kendall was so surprised, then.
I think anyone would be surprised at that question considering how long you have been a couple.
Well, I sure hope Kendall says yes.
She did I!
I figured if I found the right girl that I don't need to wait a pre-requisite amount of time to marry her.
You're right, why wait when you already found the right person.
I never got how people can talk about true love but then put timetables on when to do things.
That's a great point and one that people don't talk about enough.
It's on the table now so there's no turning back.
She'll be smart to jump at this chance.
I just had a situation with my neighbor.
What kind of situation?
I told my neighbor to move the car and they were being really rude.
It seems your neighbors aren't really friendly.
Seriously. It was just a simple task but they were being so demanding.
I never understand why people has to be so rude.
My neighbors are really pissing me off.  They always have me block in.
You didn't need to be so rude to him though.
He deserved it.  I don't know why he thinks he can park anywhere he wants to.  That is one of my spots.
This is a crowed street and his family has more than one vehicle though and he don't have anywhere else to park.
Well that is his problem, not mine!
I understand.  I guess I would be upset too.
That got really messy.
So what really happened?
I got a bunch of egg on the face because we had food fighter which was really freaking fun for everyone.
That's so cool.
I had a great time yesterday. 
Oh yes? What happened?
We had a huge food fight. I did end up getting egg thrown at my face though..
That sounds like loads of fun!
Yesterday was lots of fun.
How was the food fight? 
It was a lot of fun and a everyone seemed to enjoy it.
Did you get hit anywhere?.
Yeah! Someone threw an egg at my face. I'm fine though.
Well that's good to hear. I'm glad you had fun.
I cannot believe my boyfriend gave you the third degree about how well you knew me, Cameron.
Well, I know you like you're my sister.
It's embarrassing to me.
Don't worry about it. I passed with flying colors.
Still, doesn't he trust you as my friend? I feel like he's controlling.
I don't like him anyway and it really is none of his business.
I know that the death certificate said suicide but it also said that there was blunt force trauma on the back of the head.
So why wouldn't it be suicide?
She couldn't hit herself with something on the back of the head and she didn't fall near anything like that.
Did you mention it to the police?
Yes, and they are reopening the case. Somehow they missed it.
I'm glad you took another look.
I just checked the death certificate and it looked like he may have had a heart problem. .
Did you know about that?
No, I wonder if he may have had coronavirus. He was sick a few weeks ago.
Covid-19 can cause heart damage. You should try to get him tested  posthumously.
I will definitely see if I can do that.
I was going through the death certificate and I think I found something suspicious.
What do you mean?  What do you believe you found?
Well, it seems like the possibility of death might have gone unnoticed by officials, know what I mean?
Oh wow.  Do you think you have found evidence of foul play?
I'm not sure.  But since I have a lot of experience in this type of thing, it's a strong possibility.
Let's get down to the sheriff's office and see what we can get done about this!
Is everyone feeling comfortable?
I'm a bit cold actually.
I'm sorry about that. Let me rake these coals over the fire and add more wood.
Thank you so much for that.
Do you feel any better now?
I'm much warmer, thanks!
Is it starting to feel a little bit warmer now?
Yeah, it's a lot cozier now. What did you do?
We have a pretty old fashioned heating setup, so I just added more wood to the fire and raked some coals to get the heat going.
Well whatever you did, it worked. I'm almost getting too hot now.
It was so cold last night when I went outside for more logs.
You should have just put on warmer clothes.
Oh I was okay but my grandma is always freezing so I kept stirring the fire and adding wood for her.
You are really patient with your complaining grandma.
It was really no big deal because everyone else was too cold too.
I am coming to your house next time I can't get warm!
It's getting a little chilly in here.
It is getting cold in here with that blizzard heading our way.
I'll have to keep adding wood to keep it warm.
Do we have enough wood for the week?
I think so. I may have to chop some when the sun comes up.
I'll help you.
I don't want people to just read my book, I want them to understand it.
How do you suppose you get people to understand it in a fun way?
For me, I use metaphors, that way I can connect with others in several ways.
Wow, I never thought of that before, that is a really genius idea.
I learned it from my college professor who taught me all I have to know about writing.
Sounds like you give him 5 stars on yelp!
I worked really had on this book, and hope people can understand my work.
Is this the book about that story I read before?
It is, I changed a few metaphors so that more people could connect with it.
I was really impressed when I read it so I think it will be fine.
Thank you so much.
I wanted people to connect with my readers.
How do you think you did with that?
I spent a lot of time trying to use metaphors that related to people and their lives.
I can't wait to read your book.
I have your copy at home. I'll bring it tomorrow.
I'm not sure but because Sydney is yelling, it's safe to assume her expression is out of anger this time.
Yeah, people normally yell when they are angry.
I can't argue that one.
You are right about that.
Sydney, I think you need to calm down a bit.
What you talking about, I am not mad.
Yes I think you are because you are yelling right now and your brows are narrow.
Oh, maybe you are right I was just so angry
Its ok just take a deep breath
Gross, that steak looked nasty. Undercooked and it smelled funny.
That's weird, that never happens here. The food is always good.
I know. Must be a new cook or something.
Hopefully they'll get it right.
Kai helped me pick out my outfit for my job interview.  I just had no idea.
Kai has great fashion sense.  She just knows the thing to wear for different occasions.
I felt really comfortable in the outfit she choose for me.
Did you shop together?
She took me to that big outdoors mall.  I had a great time trying out different looks.
I love shopping with Kai.
Kai thinks I should dress up.
The job interview isn't good.
Yea but it's good to dress up.
I've done that before and it worked.
What happened?
I got the job at it.
I left school to get some food.
Why didn't you just eat the cafe food?
I didn't want it. I'd rather sneak out.
Whatever. As long as you ate something.
I have to get something to eat.
Why didn't you eat something at the school cafeteria?
I don't like the food there. So I just asked if I could leave the premises.
And they let you?
Yeah. But now I have to find a place to get some food.
If you're buying, I'll go with you.
I'm really hungry, but the caferia's menu is awful today.
Are you going to find a food cart instead?
Yes, I got permission to go off campus.
Excellent, I'm going to go see if I can join you.
That would be fun.
I'll be back in a second.
I don't know how people can eat that cafeteria food at school.
I know. I pack my own lunch.
I didn't have time this morning and got permission to go out and order something.
You were lucky. Sometimes they're sticklers about letting students out.
I have diabetes so they can't play around.
Oh definitely not. You could have an episode.
I decided I would bring Lee into my home and provide him food and shelter because he has no where else to go.
Wow, that is so nice of you.
I mean he needs a family because he is an orphan and I feel really bad for him.
I bet he is happy to always have food and a roof over his head now.
He is still adjusting, but I think he definitely appreciates it.
I think he should just stay as long as you are willing to let him live with you.
I was wondering if you wanted to dance?
Sure, I don't mind.
Great! My favorite song just came on and needed somebody to dance with.
I love this song too!
Good. Sydney usually doesn't like the same songs I do.
Just because we're both friends with her doesn't mean she has good taste in music.
I sure feel like dancing.
Well, go ahead.
I don't want to dance alone.
That person at the bar is a friend of mine.  They will dance with you.
Are you sure?
Just tell them you know me, point to me, and I'll wave my approval.
I am so excited! This is my favorite song!
Sydney said you like to dance.
I do like to dance, but I don't want to dance alone.
That's too bad. I like to dance also.
Would you like to dance with me?
I would, I think that would be fun! Thank you.
I finally got up the nerve to ask Sydney's friend to dance with me.
What happened?
You know I have to dance when I hear my favorite song, but I also didn't want to be on the dance floor by myself.
So you asked Rory to dance.
Actually, he said that it's his favorite song too when I said I loved that song so I asked him if he felt like dancing.
I'm proud of you, it sounds like a lot of fun!
Oh, this is my favorite song to dance to.
Will your friend want to dance with me.
He is really cute.
Just go ask him.
Hey do you wanna dance with me?
Sure lets get out on the dance floor.
I had fun with dominoes today.
Who did you play with?
No, I stood them all up closely, tipped one and watched them all fall.
Oh, yes, I've seen videos of elaborate setups of falling dominoes.
I'll need to get a lot more dominoes to do something really interesting.
I'll bring mine over some day and we can give it a go together.
I cant wait to have this domino play set.  It looks really good and I cant wait to have it in soon.
Right right make sure to not let all the dominos fall as well.
i wont.  That is my end goal just to make sure that the dominos are not taken up
that is such a smart idea.  I really think that overall te person has to play dominos corectly to truly acheive in it
that is well said.  sometimes I just let all the dominos fall completely to the ground and I feel relieved
yeah thats a smart way to look at it
That domino play set took me all day to set up.
How many hours did it take you?
I started in the morning and didn't finish until eight PM.
Wow, that's a long time. What did you do when you were done?
I knocked over one domino and watched the rest of them fall.
That must've been pretty cool to watch.
I hope I remembered to put that book in my backpack.
You mean the hardcover book with the blue cover? I think you did.
Yeah, it belongs to Taylor and I need to return it to him -- oh here it is.
You found it? Yeah, I was pretty sure you had packed it.
I'm glad I did. I'm supposed to see Taylor later today at school.
Yeah, say hi to him for me when you see him.
You know how I borrowed the book 1984 from Taylor?
Yeah.
Well I will see her in school later today to return the book.
Was it a good book?
Yeah it's about a dystopian future in 1984 because it was written in 1949.
Oh I know that book it's by George Orwell.
I had a weird dreams that Jesse's subconscious was controlling me and making me act weird.
That is kind of strange. Did you do some drugs ?
No, but I was really out of it that night.
Jesse controls you in real life anyway. Wrapped around her finger.
I love her so what do you expect. I'm hooked.
I heard you had a dream about Austin last night.
I did! Jesse was controlled by me during the dream.
That is so weird! What did you make them do?
I made them do my work for me at the office.
That is evil, but also hilarious!
I know, dreams are always weird.
It was a crazy dream man you were controlling me
Controlling how?
like i was your puppet you had me do some weird stuff
um i hope not
no no not like that like weird like ride a unicycle in a top hat
oh that is strange
I had a really bad day today at school.
Oh, you know you are pretty new at the school so it can be tough.
Yeah, I asked all of the kids if they wanted to play during recess and they said no.
It's okay because it's the first week and they are getting to know you.
Maybe it will be better and the kids will want to play with me next week.
I'm sure they will want to play with you since you are a nice boy.
I recently moved to a new school.
How do you like it?
I have no friends yet.
You should join them during break time.
None of the children had asked me to play at recess.
Start by introducing yourself to them.
I broke my leg last night.
What in the world happened?
I was walking to the car and it was icy. I slipped fell and dropped my bag.
I can pick up some deicer for you if you would like.
My knee is hurting so bad right now
Oh no, are you okay?
Yeah, I slipped and fell when I was walking outside
Sorry to hear that, I know it is very slippery out there
yeah it is, I am also upset because I dropped my new bag and it got very wet and dirty
I see. Maybe you can wash it or wipe it down
I had to do everything on my own.
Oh no. Why is that?
I had to deal with a bunch of new kids.
That's fine. Just give them time.
Jordan you didn't have to bring me food
Its ok, I felt bad I know you had to skip breakfast
Well now your going to be hungry
No I'll just get back in line, my mom made me eat like four eggs cause she thought they were going to go bad
At least your mom cooks
Believe me it's not as good as it sounds.
I was all the way at the end of the line so Jordan brought me a plate of food. I guess he felt bad for me!
That was awfully nice of him.
It was; he doesn't know how to make a good buffet plate, though.
No, why not? Isn't it just piling on as much food as possible?
Not at all - you have to limit things like bread and get more of the expensive things, like shrimp.
You have a good system.
It was really sweet of Jordan to bring me food.
That's nice of him.
Yeah. I guess he felt bad because I was at the end of the line.
He is such a considerate guy.
He is. I'm gonna buy him dinner one of these days.
I'd love to be invited to that.
I always plan to watch an highly recommended movie!
When will you eventually watch it?
I did already. I had to hold my emotions until it came to an end.
I can see that you really enjoyed the movie
Yes! I did.
I was planning to watch a highly recommended movie.  The end got to me.  I got really emotional.
Did you enjoy it?
It was a great movie.  It's an animated film.  I just didn't expect to get that emotional.
That's alright.   I get emotional all the time watching movies.
I was so involved with the characters that I felt what they felt.
That's what good movies do to you.
I feel like I need some comfort food.
You do, since you look totally stressed and sad!
Yeah, I just watched the movie Stardust, which had amazing recommendations.
Was the movie an emotionally intense one?
Yeah, I held in my emotions until the end, though, when my favorite character was killed off.
That sounds awful; you should definitely get some food to cheer yourself up.
I just finished watching the movie.
which movie
The highly recommended movies have been planning to watch.
Yeah I remember. So how was it?
Interesting. I had to hold my emotions until the end of the movies
Oh right.
I'm so glad that you were able to make it.
Thanks for inviting me.
Of course. This is one of my favorite bars.
Do you like to drink a lot?
Not really. This place just has really good wings and fries.
Maybe we're going to be good friends after all. I love those things.
Hey!  How are you?
Doing good, what about you?
Doing well.  This is my first time meeting up with someone I met online.
Ah really?  Same for me.  I was kind of nervous about it.
Me too.  But you seem like a pretty decent person.  Here, I will buy us drinks.
Awesome.  I look forward to getting to know you better!
I bought my tacos this morning.
Those tacos are gross at the gas station. They'll make you ill though.
That gas station knows where to find the best food. Here, have a taco.
No thanks. Nothing is fresh on those tacos. Look at the lettuce. It's brown.
It tastes delicious. My stomach is starting to hurt though.
See! What did I tell you? How long have those nasty tacos been sitting there for?
Did you try these gas station tacos?
Oh. Gas station tacos, that doesn't sound good
I know it doesn't sound good but trust me, they are amazing
You do always know the best food
Exactly!
I guess I'll give them a shot
I got lunch for the office today on my way in this morning.
Awesome, you always bring the best food, what is it this time.
The gas station by my house has an amazing taco stand on it that always has a line, day or night.
Gas station tacos huh?
Trust me, I know where to find the best food.
You haven't been wrong yet, I'll give them a try.
I'm just so frustrated right now!
I'm sorry you're feeling that way. Can you talk a little about how you're feeling?
I did most of the work on creating a contract and my co-worker received recognition without even acknowledging me!
That must be disappointing. What was the contract for?
It was a sales contract for one of my company's clients. I spent hours drafting a proposal and my co-worker didn't recognize my contributions.
Thank you for your expressing your feelings to me. Remember that you always have someone to talk to you in times like these.
I was able to give Remy the framework for the contract so we could be successful.
Really? Did you win the contract?
Yes! We did. Remy was so happy.
I bet! That is great news.
I am glad it all worked out and Remy was able to secure the contract.
I bet Remy was thrilled too. I am happy for you both.
Did you know we are being attacked?
No I didnt.  Please inform me!
We were attacked by a group of rebels last night downtown.  Luckily are area was untouched.
How do you know this?  What can we do to stay safe?
I've been watching the news for further notice but we may have to leave town.
That's scary.  Please keep me updated!
My town was being attacked!
Is that why you are watching the news?
Yes, a war broke out.
Let's send money.
I don't know
Ok.
Did you see the news? A war is breaking out!
I missed the report. I've been really busy today.
My hometown is actually right smack dab in the middle of the war, so now I'm worried about my own safety.
Do you have anyone out of town you can stay with until the war ends?
Unfortunately, I don't. I'm stuck here.
I really hope this dies down fast i am really scared right now
we have some extra guns in the basement if they get too close to us
I dont think i could defend myself from people  trying to kill me
we can practice shooting later in my backyard and learn some target practice
this makes me fee so much better.
The man downstairs plays his stereo at top volume.
Have you complained to the landlord?
The landlord is deaf.
Do you have any recourse?
I set the controls at a different level so I too could be in defiance of the rules.
I think a war is brewing.
I had to change the rules a bit to make sure that they are harder follow.
So you cheat, to make the rules harder to follow.
Yea, it started out as a joke now it gotten a bit out of hand
Yea I hope that you don't get in too much trouble.
Me too
I have to turn it down
i can barely hear it though
well its past 10 and im not letting our crabby old neighbor send in another complaint
shes such a pill isnt she
she is, hopefully shell croak soon
i hope so too, its like walking around on eggshells here
Oh hey Casey, how are you all doing today?
It's a pleasure seeing you here at the store, Jan.
I see the little ones are having fun shopping today!
Yes, they are always up to something mischievous.
I'm not surprised as their teacher for the past year!
Hope to see you at the next school meeting soon!
Oh my I haven't seen them since pre school.
Do you kids remember your teacher?
I always thought they were so smart for their age.
They have been keeping up their grades.
Do they have plans for college.
They want to go to UCLA next year.
We heard gun shots so we hurried the children from the school into the nearby diamond mine. We hoped the militia would not find us there.
Did they find you?
I should have realized the diamonds were what they were looking for. When we heard them start to enter the mine, Sasha ran out to distract them.
She sacrificed herself for you and the children?
Yes. From what I could understand they were really excited about finding a young blonde girl. I can only imagine the worst and I know I will never see Sasha again.
That is awful, Jan. I am so sorry. I wish there was something we could do.
I'm so distraught! I think Sasha was taken prisoner!
Oh no! What happened?
The militia was in town asking questions, so we snuck into the diamond mine to hide out. But then they stormed the mine and started firing. I ran one way and she ran the other. That's the last I heard from her.
Maybe she was killed!
I don't think so. As I ran I heard yelling and one of the voices was hers. I think they just grabbed her.
Hopefully she's able to get away. She's usually pretty good in these situations.
I love this new color of blue.
Yeah, It totally gives me a water kind of feel.
It makes me feel like I'm in the ocean.
Yes, I guess you can say I sleep with the fish.
That is funny and cute.
Thank you.
I absolutely love the ocean and all the lovely fish!
I can’t believe you decorated your room with fish.
You know how much I wanted to do this, decorating my room was at the forefront of my mind.
You did a tremendous job, I must admit, I feel like I am in the ocean standing here.
That’s the whole idea!
Great job Robin!
I asked Aubrey to watch a scary movie with me.
Did she? I know she hates scary movies.
She watched on with me last night but she was so tense.
Poor Aubrey.
I held Aubrey's hand during the scariest part of the movie.
She must have been traumatized.
This is a really scary movie.
Please move closer to me.
I feel safer when I am closer to you.
Why're you holding my hand?
Like I said, I feel safer when I am closer to you.
I feel safer closer to you as well!
I was watching a scary movie with Aubrey the other day.
I can't stand to watch scary movies. I prefer comedies.
Yeah, I think Aubrey does too. He got really scared at one part so I grabbed his hand.
Did it make him feel better?
I think so, he sighed and we both just giggled a little bit.
Maybe next time you should pick a romance flick.
The lunch went great.
What did you guys eat?
We both had steaks.
Wow, were they well done?
No, I've been trying medium steaks lately.
Medium steaks are full of flavor!
Do you remember my friend Tracy from high school?
I think I do.  Was she the girl with the red hair and freckles?
Yeah, that was her.  Well, she called me out of the blue yesterday and asked me if I wanted to get lunch one day this week.
That's cool.  Are you going?  She was gorgeous!
Yes, I told her I would love to have lunch.  If it goes well I might ask her out on a real date.
That would be fantastic.  I hope things work out for you guys.
Tracy called me last night.
What has she been up to?
Just been busy with the kids, she wanted to meet for lunch since we have not got together for a couple months.
It will be nice for you to talk and chat and for her to get a break from the kids.
She said the same thing, she needs some adult time.
Hey Tracy where do you want to go for lunch?
I was thinking the new Chinese place downtown if that is ok with you.
That is fine with me, I can't wait to catch up with you.
I know, it really has been a long time since we saw each other.
I think almost 5 years since school right?
Yeah and we moved so far apart that we could never get together until now.
I know the truth now.
I'm telling lies sorry.
Why?
I'm insecure with the truth.
Oh I'm sorry.
It's horrible.
I had to put a stop to Remy and all this lying.
I can’t believe Remi would stoop to that level.
This is not the remedy that we grew up with.
I know, high school has definitely changed them.
Now we know to stay away if we want to stay out of rumor Ville.
I’ll definitely cut ties with Remy after this point.
How are things doing with my son, is he feeling better?
Yeah, after playing some videogames he started relaxing
Nice, he wasn't having a good time, I am glad he is enjpying now.
Yeahm he loves to play games, so he is ok
Thanks for inviting him so he can relax
My pleasure, he is a good kid and we enjoy him here.
Hey Cameron, I don't know why my son is acting so weird.
It's okay. Kids are weird sometimes. I told him he should stick around and try some games that the other kids are playing.
Yeah I'm glad you did. I need to stop giving in whenever he gets in these moods.
It's hard when it's your own kid. You want them to be happy.
Yeah true. But I think I'm turning him into a whiny crybaby.
Well he's young. He'll grow out of it.
I'm so bummed.  We should probably leave soon.  My son Johnny isn't having any fun and he's going to start bugging me to go home.
Just hang on a few minutes.  My boy Cameron is going to try to get him to play giant Jenga with him.
Oh good!  I'd love to see him makes some friends.
It looks like they are really hitting it off.
Perfect!  Pour me another glass of wine.
Coming right up!
Cameron, my son wants to leave. He's not having fun at this party.
Why not? Tell him we will soon have games with prizes. My kid wants him here. That's his best friend.
I think he's jealous that your son is playing with other friends, not just him.
That's dumb. It is my kid's birthday. Of course everyone would be at his party.
I don't know what to do. He'll be sad when he hears about the fun from all the other kids at school.
I'll talk to your kid and ask him to stay and play some games and when some good prizes.
Oh, it was so hard to get on that return flight. I was having the time of my life in Cancun. Why does a vacation have to end?
That was with family, right?
It sure was!  We all had a wonderful time!  And it was so good to see the cousins again. I missed them so.
This was family right?  We are talking about weeks alone with nobody but family, aren't we?  If it was my family, there would be a body count.
Your idea of a family vacation involves congical visitation at San Quentin.  We are talking about my family here. And we had a marvelous time together.
Yeah, well, look on the bright side: only 365 days until your next vacation.
Boy, vacations go by too fast. I am ready for another vacation
How was it Bai? Sounds like fun.
We loved Europe. Went to London then to Paris through the chunnel then Germany for real beer then Italy cut across to Spain then home.
Wow that is a lot of traveling.
I ran out of memory on my phone with all the pics but they are downloaded on Facebook. So I am ready for another trip.
Glad you had fun but your next two weeks will be in there quarantining. Here's your mask.
I can't wait for the family vacation next week.
Yeah, Dad we're really looking forward to it.
Yeah this summer I'm going to teach you boys to hunt fish and game.
Thanks dad. That sounds cool.
What are you guys going to do on the vacation?
Oh you know! just sit around and play video-games probably.
i have been waiting to mount that horse from the minute i seen it
i cant believe you broke into your neighbor's barn just to ride their horde
i knew i could sneak in when it was the middle of the night
youre lucky you didnt get caugt and go to jail
youre right i guess
Yesterday I almost got shot
Whoa! what do you mean you almost ate a bullet, you wanted to kill you
Well it's partly my fault. I woke up at midnight and broke into our neighbours farm
What were you looking for at your neighbours farm Kendall?
I just wanted to ride their horse, so I broke into their barn and mounted one of the horse. They came out with guns. Lucky enough they know my voice
Damn! you are lucky
I notice you have a flat.
I need help.
That's why I'm bringing this tire.
Thanks friend.
You are welcome.
Karma is good to you.
On my way home today, I saw two people trying to fix a flat tire on their car.
Was this on your way home from work?
Yes. It was on the highway. I stopped and offered to help because they looked like they were struggling.
Oh, that was so nice of you! Did they accept your help?
Yes, they did. We got the tire changed and they were able to get on their way.
Oh that's good. You showed kindness to those people The world needs more of that.
I was a good Samaritan yesterday.
How's that?
I was driving and noticed a driver and passenger trying to change a flat tire.
And I suppose you stopped to help them.
Yes, I did, and I got it changed.
Well, that's your good deed for the year.
I made fun of Jan today
I know you do it in good fun but it does hurt her feelings
her anime shirt was funny, I had to say something
just because you find it silly doesnt mean you should make fun of her
youre right
go apologize
I think I am a good teacher.
Why do you say that?
Kai really relaxed his mind while meditating.
Kai was probably really stressed otu.
That is what meditation is for.
Well then I need to try it.
I was able to teach Kai how to meditate the other day.
That's cool. Were you able to help her out?
Yeah. She told me I managed to clear her mind of thoughts.
Wow. She's always got too much going on and never relaxes.
I know. I was really glad it worked!
I bet she was glad too.
I had to fill in for Jesse today and take the kids out to play at school.
What was she doing?
She had an important doctor's appointment for her baby.
How were the kids for you?
They behaved very well for me because they know Jesse would be very upset if they misbehaved.
I think it has something to do with those kids also liking you as well.
Finally finished moving this weekend, it was brutal.
Yeah, it was hot and humid, tough time of year to move.
That and i had to do it alone, carried each and every box by myself up to the new apartment
I wish I lived closer, I could have come help.
I know.  My wife and kids were away, and the rest of guys all had to work or were on vacation.
Next time hire some movers, you shouldn't have to carry everything all by yourself.
I have finally saved enough and went to the dream home and such too
yeah there is.  I cant wait to see hwo the new home treats you
yeah overall it has been quite the expereince.  I am glad you have been here to help save and support me
right right.  You have been a great friend as well
I know thank you.  I just love how we have enough money to truly get the home we deserve
Youre so right
It feels so good to finally be able to move in my new home.
It seems like you've been saving for it for a long time.
I have. I've been working hard for two years to put a down-payment.
I hope it was worth it for you.
It is. It's my dream home.
I'm really happy for you.
I think I finally have enough savings to buy that house.
Oh my goodness. I am so proud of you.
Thanks. I will be so happy to stop renting.
You are living the dream.
Yeah, owning my home will be a dream come true.
I'm closing on the house in two weeks. I'm so excited.
That's great. Where did you get the down payment?
I have saved everything for two years even my birthday money and graduation gifts.
I knew you were being frugal but I didn't realize how much you were saving.
I just prioritized what I really needed -- and what I didn't need.
You were very smart. You will need to give me some pointers.
I found the best book for Austin
Is it one of Tolstoy's books?
Yes he loves it, I bought it immediately for his collection
Is it for his birthday?
Yes, you're invited to the party by the way
I will be there to the party
I found the best present for Austin.
What present is that?
It's a book that he loves, but it's so hard to find, so I bought it immediately.
Austin is going to be so happy with that present.
Austin loved to read the book. i finally found it today
Austin likes reading a lot!
Yes, i bought the book immediately for him.
Austin will be so suprised
And happy too
Okay, looks like we are ready to get cooking.
I'm so excited. Not to mention hungry, too.
It shouldn't be long. Let me just warm up the oven.
Are you cooking the chicken and the fish?
Sure. Give people some variety, right?
That sounds good. I'll probably try both.
I set the oven for 350 degrees. Is that right?
Let me check the package again. Yeah, that's right.
Good, okay now what do you want me to do?
Can you get a baking pan out from that left, bottom cupboard?
Sure, do you want me to line it with foil?
That would be really helpful. The foil is in the third drawer down.
I'm starving man.
Me too bro.
Ok, I'm ready to cook now.
Finally, alright I'm going to warm the oven up..
Sounds good.
Ok.
I am in a bad relationship.
That is horrible to hear.
Kendall has a long history of abuse.
Why don't you leave?
Kendall prevented my attempt to leave the relationship by hitting me very hard.
Next time call the police.
So I guess you're wondering why I have this black eye.
Yes, I was wondering.  And it looks like your nose might be broken, too.
I know.  It's because my boyfriend Kendall hit me the other night when I was trying to leave.
Oh, no!  Kendall hits you sometimes?
Yes, he is so abusive!  He has been hitting me and cursing at me for a really long time.
You should really get out of that relationship before you get seriously hurt.  There are organizations that will help you if you just get in touch with them.
So what’s going on with you?
Not much here, I heard you were playing a little game of hide and seek?
It was something like that, I was just hiding from my girlfriend.
And you decided to use Cameron as a shield?
I would’ve used anything and anyone in order to hide from her.
What did you do now?
I was lying behind Cameron.
Is that what you are doing?
Yea, I'm hiding from the girlfriend.
Why are you doing that?
Because i lie a lot.
Oh wow that's very bad.
I got an order from the big store.
Congratulations.
Hold the congratulations.
What could have happened?
I filled the order completely, supplied everything that they ordered but the order was wrong.
Admit the mistake if it was yours, forgive the mistake if it was theirs and start over.
I had a drop shipment at a customer today and apparantly the whole order is wrong.
Did you send the wrong inventory?
No. We sent the right stuff. The client's new stock person ordered incorrectly and we shipped it all but they needed other items.
Well it's not your fault. Do you have to take it back?
I'm making a deal and supplying what they need correctly but they have to pay for returning the other goods
That sounds pretty fair to me. I feel bad for that stock person though!
The Miley Cyrus concert was awesome, but I got a major scare halfway through.
What could be scary at a Miley Cyrus concert?
I got separated from my family in the giant arena!
Yikes, that would be terrifying! How did you find them again?
I had to check four different sections before I finally saw my brother's green jacket.
I'm glad you made it back to them.
I went to a concert with my family and I got lost.  It was my first concert and it was really scary.
How did you end up finding them?
I kept calling my dad but he didn't answer.  I think his phone was on vibrate.  After he realized I was missing, he called me.
How long were you separated from them?
Gosh, I guess it was about twenty minutes or so.
That must have been frustrating. I'm glad you finally found them.
I can't believe that we lost my brother and sister here.
It is a big concert, we will find them.
How are were going to find them? My parents are going to kill me!
They have a booth over there and can annouce their names, lets go over there.
i might be in trouble later
why?
i spent money on groceries instead of on drugs like i was told.
well at least you didn't buy something wasteful
yeah that's true
i'm sure you'll be fine.
I made a tough decision yesterday.
What was the decision?
I used the money to get groceries instead of paying for drugs.
That was a serious decision.
It was a tough choice.
Glad you made the right decision.
I screwed over my boyfriend.
What did you do?
I used the money he gave me.
What did you buy?
I used the money to obtain groceries instead of paying for drugs like I was told.
Stuff an apple in his mouth when he complains.
I feel relieved after spending the money because i wasnt tempted
what were you going to get with the money
i was tempted to buy some drugs with them but i spent it on things i need
that sounds like a wise decision
I just came outside for 20 minutes and I've been out here for an hour.
What made you go outside?
I wanted the dog to get out of the house. He's been cooped up all day.
You guys don't him go out by himself?
Not until we get this fence fixed no, we have to be with him or he'll dart.
Smart little bugger. Knows not to try it when you're there.
The dog is getting kind of antsy, don't you think.
Yeah, he seems a bit fussy right now.
I think I should take Teddy outside.
That sounds like a plan, I will go with you.
Thanks, oh yeah he  seems to be better now.
Great, I was honestly quite worried about him.
I never joked around with Sasha.
Why not? She's your little sister.
I was the oldest and took care of her because our mother was a drunk.
That's a bad situation overall. You not having a childhood.
Now, Sasha and I have no relationship. She said I was too harsh with her.
That's not your fault. That's your mom's fault.
Sasha tells me I'm too serious sometimes, but I never liked joking around.
You've always been a very serious person, Jesse.
I've never played any tricks on Sasha even though Sasha is constantly messing with me.
I hope you don't take that personally. Sasha is just trying to have fun with you.
I think I have just always been a very serious person.
You have been since you were a little kid, you never liked pranks.
Really, never?
Yes, I remember pulling a prank on you once as a kid and you told your mom on me.
Wow, I am sorry about that. I still do not like pranks or tricks to this day.
Some of us are just more serious than others I guess.
I met with Kendall today.
She can be difficult.
I asked her about her interests.
What were you hoping to accomplish?
I wanted to go to the movies with her and hoped she would agree.
Kendall showed interest so we bought tickets to the movie.
I hoped she would go with me to the movies
Did you give it your best show
I tried to arouse in all hopes she would go with me
Did it work
Well lets hope so
Kendall didn't want to go to the movie at first, but I managed to convince her.
How did you do that?
Let's just say I know what gets her going.
Normally she hates going out to movies.
The movie was a horror film, and she loves to go see those things on the big screen. I just had to get her interested first.
I only have one child.
Oh really. You are so good with all of my kids. I thought you would have three or four.
No. I had medical issues that prevented me from having more kids.
I don't mean to be nosy, but what medical issues?
I had uterine cancer. I had to have a hysterectomy.
If you really want more kids, you can always adopt or even foster. There are so many kids that need families.
Hi there Charla! How are you?
I'm doing good Lee, how about you?
I'm going to see my son today, so I am very happy.
Do you just have one child Lee? You seem like such a good father.
Yep, just the one! He is my pride and joy.
I'm glad you came to the zoo with me Beyonce.
Hey what are friends for. Do you want to see the jungle cats?
Yes, I'd love to see all the cats.
This one is a tiger.
Oh My I've never seen a tiger before. It's huge.
Yes the cats here are quite rare.
Wow! What is that thing! It's scary as heck!
That's a tiger! Are you joking? Have you never seen a tiger before?
Oh my gosh, I guess not! I always thought tigers were those little cats that have tufts on their ears! That thing is terrifying!
Lynxes? Wow, unbelievable. I can't believe you've never seen a tiger before. You must have been born under a rock.
Oh wow what kind of big cat is that in the cage?
I am pretty sure it's a tiger, see the stripes on it's back
He is so pretty, I don't think I've ever seen a tiger before
They are a lot bigger than I thought they would be
yeh he's huge, I'm glad these things don't just walk the streets haha
Right holy cow, move over for the tiger!
I took the kids to NYC to see their favorite artist.
Did you guys have fun?
We did. They were so happy.
That's great. Did you get to see the city also?
Yeah. We all walked around the sights.
It's good the whole family had a good time.
I still can't believe I went to New York City to see Panic at the Disco!
How was the show?
The kids loved it and I actually enjoyed it too!
Did you get to do anything else while you were there?
We went to a few museums, but the concert was the only thing the kids really cared about.
You made some great memories and that's what matters.
I took the kids to NYC this afternoon.
Oh really, what did y'all do?
We saw one of their favorite artist's exhibit at a gallery.
That sounds like a very educational, cultural outing.
It was, and the kids wanted to buy a painting but I couldn't afford it.
That's the drawback of being around beautiful, expensive things!
I knew who did it right after the prank happened
She does seem like the one who would light a firecracker in class
yea, i seen her buy them yesterday after school and wondered what she was up to
she is such a class clown i think she would do anything for attention
I had no luck at basketball today.
What went wrong?
Each time I got the ball there was no opening for me to shoot.
What did you do?
I passed the ball to a different teammate and hoped to get an assist if she scored.
It is better to play the game than to have never played at all.
I got the ball with 3 seconds left, but was a tad outside my range.
So did you just fire it up?
No I wanted to be the hero but there was an open teammate under the rim.
Nice. So you won the game?
No, she missed an easy layup.
No good dead goes unpunished.
I felt like I had to make that final pass since I didn’t have a good look at the basket.
You did the right thing, as forcing up a shot would not have been good.
The execution was there I just didn’t go in.
As they say, you win some you lose some.
That’s the truth.
Will get them next time.
I tossed the ball but missed the shot.  I passed it instead to my teammate.
Did your teammate make the shot?
Of couse, he's the best shooter on the team.
Everyone has their strengths and weaknesses.
He could shoot from anywhere on the court and I am ninety percent certain he'll make it.
That's incredible.
I invited Jan to dinner.
That cheapskate always says he doesn't have any money.
He said he didn't have any money.
And you paid for his dinner.
And I paid for his dinner.
Add your name to the list, sucker.
Here, let me pay for your meal.
No Jordan, I can pay for my own meal.
No really, you were kind enough to pay for me when  I had no money.
Well that is really sweet of you, thanks.
It is the least I can do.
Well next time we can just go halves.
I invited Jam to dinner and had to pay for his dinner because he didn't have any money.
That's nice of you. Maybe he thought you were paying because you invited him to go?
I asked him to go, but not like an I am paying invitation.
Oh. Do you think he will pay you back?
No, he just lost his job. I'm never seeing that money again.
Hey! Do you want to come in and have dinner with us tonight?
No, I'm sorry I can't. Already have other plans.
Doing what? Watching tv and eating ice cream?
No. Those are tomorrows plans. Tonight I have a date.
Oh, really? Finally coming out of your shell I see.
Yeah, yeah. I'll give you a call tomorrow and let you know how it went.
Hey, Sally, come on in.
Sorry, I have to get to the store.
You're walking all that way?
Yes, my bike is broken.
Well, come in and rest and I'll get you a drink.
I can't; I don't have the time.
I cant stand this guy Austin that i work with he is starting to be annoying
what is he doing that is so annoying to make you mad
He keeps making fun of my limp and says that i walk like a zombie
maybe you should tell your manager about him if he keeps it up
I think i will eventually
There's a new guy at work named Austin who is so funny.
How is he funny?
It's unintentional, and that makes it even funnier.
Do you let him know he's funny?
I make fun of him because of it, I do it all day long.
Just be sure his feelings don't get hurt.
Hey thanks for getting me this job Austin.
You're welcome it's a good thing there was an opening a few months ago.
Yes it was, why do where those dorky glasses?
I wear glasses to be able to see.
Ok, but why do you where those old people clothes?
Why are you making fun of me all day everyday?
The debate was kind of a difficult one.
Were a lot of people not agreeing with you?
It wasn't me that was the problem. It was Sasha's position in the debate.
Did you argue against her?
No, I actually supported her. But her way of going about it was wrong.
I actually admire you going against the popular opinion for your friend..
Sometimes the right thing is not the popular thing
are you talking about Sasha's position on legalizing drugs
yes, I think Sasha is right and I said so in the recent debate
it's hard to know what's right because it's a very complicated issue
it is complicated, but the more we talk about it the better conclusion we can reach
yeah, but when the best conclusion is not popular it's a struggle to get there
I went on a hot air balloon ride today.
I always wanted to do that. What was it like?
It was amazing! I got a really awesome view of the city from above.
Did you have your phone with you so you could take some pictures?
No, I took video. I have a whole thing recorded.
I can't wait to see that video.
I went on a hot air balloon ride.  I saw the most amazing view of the city from above.
Who did you go with?
My friend was on break from college so we planned a weekend trip up north.
Have you been on a hot air balloon before?
No, I am a fear of heights, but once I was up there and saw how magnificent the view was, I forgot all about my fear.
It's great that you conquered your fear.
Hey! Need any help moving some furniture?
Hey! Thanks for stopping by! No one else wanted to help!
No problem. That’s what friends are for.
I can’t wait to get out of this tiny apartment and into my new house!
I’m so happy for you! It’s such a nice house!
Thanks! You’re welcome by anytime!
I can help you move these big boxes for you since they are so heavy.
Sure let me grab this side so we can move them together
would you like me to put them right on the moving truck
Yea, put them on there so we dont have to move them again
that is a great idea.
I got a bunch of money for my graduation, but I think I'm gonna save it.
That's a really good idea.
Yeah, I thought about putting it towards a car, but I think I'd rather save it.
You do have a car, so I think it's better to save it for something else.
That's what I was thinking. I'd like a nicer car, but I don't need a car right now.
Exactly. Plenty of time to get a new car down the road.
I’m going to try to save as much as this money as I can.
What are you planning to use it for?
I’m not quite sure yet, but I have a few ideas in my head.
What are these ideas?
Definitely down payment on a car in deposits on an apartment.
Those are very reasonable expenses.
I just graduated high school.
Congratulations my little friend.
I got some money from graduation.
Do you have plans for the money?
I want to put the money away for now.
There is no rush to decide so you are making a wise decision.
I have a slot open right now if you want to come in for a quick massage.
I can't today.  I'm too busy.  Have things been busy there too?
Yeah.  I just finished giving Kendall her after-marathon, leg-stretch session.
Oh, thats right, she ran in that half-marathon thing yesterday.
RIght. She usually comes in for a massage after her races. She says it really helps to release tension in her legs and back, and it helps her recovery faster.
I struggled opening up the peanut butter jar this morning.  I could use a good massage too!  Any open slots for tomorrow?
I hate to leave my friends behind but I had to do it
You can’t be too worried about who you left behind because this is about you.
Yes, I am the one that was dealing with this but I still like the people I work with.
That’s fine, but who do you work it does not determine how they were treating you.
You make a good point.
What’s next for you?
I had a serious problem at work.
What happened?
My employer treated me unfairly.
That is serious.
I thought about it and decided to quit.
I cannot blame you for taking that action.
I ride my bike everywhere.  It's the best workout.
It's also great for the environment.
Yeah, we need to do everything we can to save the environment.  There's too much pollution, especially in this big city.
You are such an athlete, you should join those cyclist that bike up the trails.
They are so hardcore.  I did that once.
They are a tight community.
I love riding my bike.
You are quite the athlete.  How much do you ride a week?
I don't know for sure, but at least a 100 miles.
That's a lot of miles.
Well, I ride everywhere.
I prefer four wheels beneath me.
I love riding this bike.
Is that the new one?
I paid three grand for it.
That cost more than my car.
It is like my car, I ride it everywhere.
You look really fit too.
Addison had not stopped looking at me all night.
How did you react?
I stared back at him.
Did that make him stop?
I so sad that we lost the soccer tournament. We made it all the way to the finals.
I'm glad I got to see the game. It sucks that you lost it in the last few minutes.
Yeah I had finally got the nerve up to get off the bench and play and I was doing good too.
If it wouldn't have been for that last kick.  Your teams goalie should have caught that.
The goalie lost it for all of us.  It makes me so mad.
Don't say that. It was a team effort.  I am sure he tried his best.
I am so nervous to play, I think I will sit this one out.
No way Bailey, you have to play!
OK, but you have to be on my team.
I will do all that I can while on it.
I am afraid that we are going to lose.
Sorry Bailey, we did end up losing.
I finally got the nerve to play yesterday.
Finally! How'd the game go?
I lost.
Oh man. You'll get the win next time.
Hopefully. Will you help me practice?
Of course I can.
Today's game didn't go our way.
Did you guys lose?
Yeah, we lost.
Did you manage to play?
Yeah, I gathered up courage and played.
That's a good initial step.
I was wicked nervous to play baseball, and with good reason.
I know you get nervous about sports, but what happened to make you feel that way?
Well, it went awful, so no wonder I was nervous. It went as bad as I thought it would!
Come on. It wasn't that bad, was it?
Yes it was. The team lost because of me getting tagged out!
No. You just need practice, that's all!
My patient, Paul, came in today needing dental work.
Did you fix Paul's teeth?
Paul has the perfect teeth.  He has no cavities, but then he chip his front tooth eating nuts.
That happened to my mom too.
I told him he's needs a crown and he's upset about that, but that's what will save his tooth.
I am sure you'll take care of it.
Well today was definitely an interesting day at work!
You seem amused. Tell me about your day.
I had a very memorable patient come in for dental work. I will never forget this experience.
As a dentist you have probably seen it all. But sounds like this was extraordinary.
It was. This person had anomalous teeth, something I haven't encountered much. I ended up saving his teeth.
This is something you'll be able to tell your grandchildren one day.
I had a really unusual patient at work today?
What kind of patient.
The patient just had anomalous teeth and needed dental work.
Well, it's no wonder he needed to go to the dentist.
He really did. But it was so unusual I even saved his teeth.
Before you ask, no, I don't want to see it.
I finally bought a new guitar.
Is it the same one you told me about months ago?
Yes, it took me a long time to save enough money.
Guitars can be expensive these days.
I also had to wait for it to become available, it was out of stock for a long time.
I guess a lot of people are buying guitars these days.
I just bought that guitar I've been wanting.
Wow, that's awesome!
Yeah, I had to save for months to afford it.
You'll have to show it to me sometime.
Definitely, I'll play a song or two for you.
That sounds even better.
After waiting for months to get my hands on this guitar, I’m happy.
I didn’t know when it would come but it finally got here.
I’ve been telling you guys it was coming for a long time that’s why you didn’t know.
You’re gonna have to play me something to make up for us waiting around forever
I’ll practice first before I take requests
On the piano with your voice?
I think that these kids need to have some sort of snack that is healthy for them.
It doesn’t have to be a nasty snack either.
Exactly, it could be fruits and nuts.
People here are healthy snack and they go overboard.
They just forget that there are a lot of snacks that are very healthy and not that bad.
Let’s put a plan in action to make this happen.
I can't afford to work at the school anymore!
I thought they were paying you to work there?
Well, I like to bring the kids fruits to have healthy snacks.
Doesn't the school pay for that?
No, the school pays for nothing.
That is crazy!
I made sure the kids of my school had healthy foods.
What were they taking in the past?
Their usual junk.
How did you go about providing the food?
I just supplied the school with food.
You are really caring then.
Kendall is coming alot with his forms on the ice.
My son has been practicing every night with the turns that you taught him.
Tommorow morning, I want to keep him on the ice until he makes the triple turn we have been working on.
I will let him to cancel his plans for the afternoon with his friends.
I think Kendall is ready for a leadership position but I don’t want him to know it yet.
Do you want him to gain confidence on his own?
Yes, and I want to give him managerial tasks and see how he deals with them.
That is a good idea, give him a taste of the job first.
If i throw him to the wolves now he might freeze up.
I wish I had you as a boss, you know how to do things right.
I must have had too many.
At least you recognize you have a problem.
Taylor told me to leave the party because my bad behavior was embarrassing her.
At least you got home safe.
I didn't drive but stumbled away and the next morning I called Taylor to apologize.
Better safe than sorry.
Taylor, what is your problem?  Why did you make me leave your party last night?
Sasha, the way you were acting was making me ashamed of you!  You got naked and jumped up and down on the hood of my mom's car, you puked in my little sister's playhouse, and you peed on my dog!
I was just having fun!  I mean, it was a freaking PARTY!
I don't like behavior like that.  My dad liked it, though!
For the record, I didn't mean to pee on your dog.  I didn't even know he was there!
Well, did you know my dad was there when you peed on him???
Why do you have a black eye, who hit you?
It was my boyfriend, he got mad at me for coming home late.
I told you to stop seeing him, he is a bad person and is going to end up killing you.
I know I don’t know what’s wrong with me.
I think maybe you need to come stay with me tonight.
Okay I will go get some things and be right over.
I'm pushing your hair back for a reason.
I got that black eye from him.
I'm going to kick his ass right now.
Yea that's fine.
Side hustles did that to you.
Yea what a jerk.
Oh, that is funny!
What has tickled you this time?
I just drove by a sign which read, Slow Down for Construction Workers
What's so funny about that?
I slowed down and there was nobody there!  So, I stopped tha car and changed the sign to read, Slow Down for No Reason At All
Nice!
Thanks for driving me to work, my mom really needed to borrow my car today
Oh no problem, I have to drive right by it anyway
Looks like construction ahead, I can see orange and white cones
Dang that came up quick, I didn't know know this was going on
Oh there's the sign that says slow down for the construction crew, they should have made that more visible
Right! Well at least we know now and proceed accordingly
I drove by a construction crew today.
Are they building that new apartment complex on Green Street?
Yeah, what's strange is the slow down sign was placed like two blocks away from the actual site.
And there was no sign closer than two blocks away?
Yeah, just one sign.
I don't know if that's safer than having a sign twenty feet away.
Yesterday was the scariest thing.
I'm sorry! What happened?
Well, the fire alarm went off. I was so nervous.
Wow, what did you do?
Well, I tried to be as calm as possible, but tell people to get out.
I'm glad that you were able to do that. It's not easy to remain calm in those times.
I had a very hectic day today!
Oh yeah? What happened?
I was in a big meeting and the fire alarm went off!
I bet that was scary!
Yes, but I stayed calm and help everyone get through the door quickly.
I bet they were proud of that!
I had some issues I had to resolve.
How did you work on them?
I took my own confidence and discussed the pros and cons with myself.
Did you resolve your issues?
I figured out a solution without external help.
That is commendable.
I was confused earlier about some issues.
Were you able to come up with a solution?
I was just talking to myself earlier and I think I came up with a solution.
That's good and you didn't need any help.
I think the solution was simple to the these kinds of issues.
Good! So problem solved!
Hey Cameron, I can't believe we beat that team.
Yeah, they've been our rivals and were rated really well.
Last time things didn't go so well.
Yeah, but this time that play you made saved us.
Ah come on, everyone did well.
Nah, we couldn't have done it without you!
Cameron was incredible.
Oh I know, she was really in control of the field.
Not only that she hit two home runs!
She is such an incredible athlete.
Seriously!
This definitely feels good.
What did?
Cameron gave me real satisfaction when we won that gave versus the top standing rival club house.
I bet that sure was a good feeling.
In every situation I've been I've always seen honesty to be the best option.
Hmm, explain?
Think of every lie you told don't you get a horrible aftertaste from telling it?
You know what? You're right I do!
Yeah, even if it doesn't come back to bite you, you still  have to live with being a deceitful person!
Yeah, who wants to live a life like   Pinocchio?
Have you tried this tap water before?
No, I never drink tap water.
I think I am going to try it.
Well, how was the taste?
Awful. It tastes like there was no filtering at all.
Well, there probably wasn't.
The water tested strange.  I had left it out all day in the heat so I threw it out.
Did you have any more water?
I just bought a new case from the store.
They have water in stock again?
The one I went to had a new shipment.
You lucked out.
I went to get a glass of water last night and it tasted disgusting so I threw it out.
What did it taste like?
It tasted like metal, like the way a coin would taste.
That is not good, maybe you should get it tested.
I plan on it, I hate having to buy bottles of water at the store.
Yeah that is really a waste of money.
Im so thirsty
here drink this
Ew whats wrong with it
I dont know i just opened it
It tastes disgusting im going to throw it out
Put it in the blue bin please
I got a job offer for my dream job today!
Congratulations!! When will you start?
Not until next month, so I'll have a chance to take one more vacation.
That's so exciting. I know you've worked really hard for this.
It's all paid off now.
Have a great vacation.
Friends and family, I have an announcement to make!
What is it, don't keep us waiting!
I got a new job and it is amazing, I have always dreamed of doing this! I can't believe I got hired on so early in the game
Congratulations! I am so happy for you!
I am so lucky, I am going kill it!
Awesome, you deserve this, good luck with your new career buddy!
I'm in such a good mood because I didn't think I would get the job.
I knew you would get it because you were overqualified for it
i guess going to college for eight years did pay off in the end
I'm just glad you finally found yourself a good job and you can make decent money now
so am i
You are one of the first I wanted to call and share the news with.
What's up bud, you guys finally getting married?
No, but that is coming. I got that job I told you about!
No you didn't! So proud of you man. I knew all them late nights would make a difference.
I finally got hired for my dream job.
Congratulations. You must be so happy.
Yes, I called all my friends to share the news.
I am sure they are happy for you as well.
We got destroyed out on the court.
I have never seen us play so bad.
I don't know what the heck was going on out there.
No shots were falling and we were turning over the ball.
We also played so badly in defence.
We need to get the group together and practice.
I almost got skunked by Alex today at basketball.
Ouch, that sucks.
Yeah, but it was a lesson in humility. I just had to pick myself back up again.
Tenacity is important in sports. Don't give up!
I don't intend to. I already challenged Alex to another game this weekend.
That was such a poor display.
You did get schooled, but lift your head up and go again.
Yeh, I guess I'm not as good at basketball as I thought.
That's not the attitude, you just need more practice.
Either way, I'm going to keep training and improving.
You should.
I've never been comfortable making changes like moving to a new place.
I can understand that, it's really a big deal.
It can be when someone close like Riley moves away, it's sad.
But you still keep in touch, right?
Yeah, me and Riley have kept in touch the whole time.
I'm sure it's easy to do these days with the internet and all the other tech we have.
I'm so scared to move.
Why?
I can't move my legs.
You should in touch with Riley.
Till when?
Until the doctors come.
I am really scared about moving to a new city.
I know but think of all the exciting new things you will get to experience.
I know but I will miss Riley.
I'm sure she will miss you too but I she will keep in touch with you.
Will you talk to me the whole way there as well?
Yes I will keep in touch with you the whole time.
Can I come over to your place?
Did something happen between you and Addison?
He cut my arm.
How did that happen?!
We were arguing over something dumb, and he got really upset and cut me with a knife from the sink.
Please get over to my house now!
Hello! Oh, I am so hungry!
I'm sorry to hear that. I'm here if you want to talk about it.
I don't know where to go eat!
Maybe I should take you to someplace nearby serving food?
Now I am so hungry, I cannot go myself.
Let me take you to get some food.
I was so hungry I wasn't sure that I could keep looking for a place to eat.
What did you do? Did you find some food.
Yes I just found the first place I could.
I know that feeling when you are so hungry you just need to eat.
I was really upset with that restaurant.
I noticed, you behaved in a crazy way.
I was angry, and the food was terrible.
I got scared when you threw the fries on the ground and what did you do with the chicken?
I threw the chicken in the toilet.
You are crazy Riley.
I feel so much better and that was so much fun, throwing fries on the ground and chicken in the toilet!
Why did you do that?! What possessed you?!
I am trying to retrain my anger and reactions to negative responses.
You do know that you wasted a perfectly good meal over your dad's response to you hanging out tonight.
Yep, not only do I have a mess to clean up, I have lost driving privileges for a month.
Good grief, so immature.
I wrote a ten page letter to Skylar to let her know who much I love her books.
Did you hear back from her?
No, but I hope to.  I just sent it last week.
Well, I'm sure she gets a lot of fan mail so it might be awhile before you hear from her.
I'll be checking my mail every day.
Let me know when you get something back from her.
Skylar is the best writer I have ever read a book by.
She is pretty great, she writes great books.
I wrote her a 10 page fan letter letting her know how much I adore her books.
Wow, that's really cool I hope she will respond to it.
I don't have my hopes up for that buy maybe she will.
That would be the coolest thing ever.
Have you ever heard of Skylar, the famous writer?
Yes, I have read some of her books
Great, I wrote her a huge letter to her today
Like a fan letter?
Yes, I told her how influential she has been to me in my career
She will really appreciate that from you. I hope she writes back!
I've got a surprise for my niece tonight
Is it Tetris?
Close, I'm going to teach her some chess and bake a pie for her.
Awesome! Isn't it a bit difficult for someone her age though?
I'm sure I can work my way around it.
I would expect nothing less from you.
there is something I really miss doing
What is that?
I miss babysitting my niece, it was so much fun
what did you guys do together?
we would play games and even cook!
that sounds fun, I miss times like that too
My niece loves having me babysit her because I play games with her and make her whatever she wants for dinner.
You are the cool aunt.
Something like that.  Kids give me so much joy.
They can be fun.
That's the thing about being an aunt.  I am only around for the fun times.
True.  You are lucky.
I'm so proud of the feature film I just finished.
How is it?
I showed it to all my other friends and they loved it.
When will you be showing it next?
I'll be showing it again this weekend if you are free.
I can't make it this weekend, but how about next weekend?
I want to present the feature film.
What do you suggest we do.
Download it to wav file.
Yeah that will work.
That's super easy.
Everyone will be super happy.
Maybe I was a little harsh with Cameron in the past.
Really? What did you do?
I would constantly nit pick every little thing.
I guess you live and you learn to not do it again in the future.
Yeah, I love working here because the environment is more relaxed and I don't have to micromanage.
I'm going to get her for breaking my legs with that bat!
Are you in a lot of pain?
Yes, the pain pills are helping, though. Kendall's dead!
You need to get out of that gang. Leave or you'll be in prison.
My gang is my family.
I'll be visiting you in prison instead of the hospital then.
Kendall broke both my legs but he hasn't got the best of me yet.
Robin, you are in the hospital and will probably never walk again.
Don't you ever say that, never say that again.
I don't know what to say, aren't you done with gang stuff yet?
You bet, I am going to get better, so much better that I am going to apply at the police academy.
But Robin you hate the police.
Hey bud, look who's coming down the street.
Jeez, it's those thugs from that gang again, isn't it?
Yeah. They live a few houses away and they always come by here flaunting their cars and money and guns. See these rocks in my hands?
I think I know what you're planning...are you sure about this?
Yeah, I'm going to throw these rocks at them to send a nice, loud message that they aren't welcomed here!
I want nothing to do with it. I don't want to get killed!
I really let the gang members in the neighbourhood have it yesterday.
I told you to stop bothering them. What did you do?
I threw a bunch of rocks at their cars and broke some windows.
What do you think they're going to do if they find out it was you?
They won't find out. I did it after it got dark and they didn't see a thing!
Hi friend, I'm in big trouble.
What happened?
I threw rocks at the gang's cars.
What!! how come you came in contact with the gang?
I lived a block away from the gang and sometimes I do throw stones but this time it hit their cars.
Maybe you should come stay with me for a while.
Bailey's computer is so much faster and smoother than mine.
What are you using it for?
I'm playing some super fun video games on it.
Are you playing by yourself?
No, I'm playing online with some friends
Can I play with you guys?
I sat at bailey's computer and went online
was she aware that you went online with it?
No, I even played some fun video games with friends online
seems like you enjoyed yourself
I'm really digging this new version of candy crush.
You should get off Bailey's new computer, he needs to use it.
Chill, I will, just let me finish this game.
Okay, because he should be finishing his project.
I want to play football.
Are you on a team?
I have researched the available teams.
Are any if the teams located here?
I have several choices right where we live.
I hope you can play for the local team of your choice.
I think I'm going to join a football team.
You should do it.
Yeah, the game is so fun.. I really want to play more.
I hear the YMCA has a team.
Seriously?
Yeah, see if you can join.
So I have trials with the Bulldogs tomorrow!
Who are the Bulldogs?
You know, the semi pro football team. I called them up and got a trial.
Wow that's amazing! Did you tell them you were a wide receiver or quarterback? I know you've play both.
I told them I was a wide receiver. They already have a good quarterback.
That's a good idea. Plus you can always fill them in on your history later in case they need a new quarterback.
You know I really like football.
You should join I team.
Well, I'm trying out for one at the moment.
Really? What team.
The local semi-pro team, the Knights.
Well, good luck.
Did you get a call from Kai about me yesterday?
No, why would she call me about you?
She thought I was missing and she called my Husband to ask about me
I see, she really cares about you
Yeah but she worried my Husband, a lot
Better that then to not care about you
I don't know why everyone overreacted like that. I just went on a little shopping spree.
Nobody knew where you were, that's why. You usually leave a note, plus you weren't answering your phone.
I wanted to get there before the sale ended so I was in a rush and forgot to take my phone with me.
That's why Kai called your husband. He was just concerned about you.
I guess I should be grateful. Having people worry about me is kind of flattering.
Right, no harm done. Next time just make sure you've got your phone with you.
I put Taylor as the front of the class.
Why? she the worst grade on the test.
All the more reason to sit up front. It makes it easier to ask questions and pay attention.
she said she doesn't want to be at the head of the class. It's really embarrassing.
Why would it be embarrassing?
Everyone will be staring at her apparently. They'll know something is up.
I don't get Taylor's behaviour anymore
Why?
I put him at the head of the class and he's still not trying
Didn't he get the worst grade?
Yes!
That doesn't make any sense to me then
I put my worst student at the head of the class today.
What on earth did you do that for?
I think the accountability will help him improve his grades.
I don't know, Bailey. Some kids are just bad students.
Taylor is actually a very talented student, but he always sits at the back of the class and goofs off, thinking I won't notice. Now that he's at the head of the class, he'll have to take things more seriously.
I cant believe I've put Taylor at the head of the class
I've known her for a while now and she likes to mess around
In hindsight, it was maybe a bit strict.
Well, maybe you could explain your reasons behind it
I guess it isn't that big of a deal anyways
I doubt she really cares to be honest
I had to keep correcting Skylar today at work.
What was she doing wrong?
Each time the team was in conversation, she'd stop mopping so I had to tell her to try to talk and work.
Did she listen?
Yes she is going to be a good worker after she's trained.
I think you will be a good boss too.
I had to get on Skylar to do her chores again.
She's entered those teenage years.
She's just been very distracted lately.
School and games are too much of a distraction for their generation.
Tell me about it. My wife will need to speak to her about it.
We can talk about dinner plans later, I told Skylar.
Ah, how did she react?
She sulked a little, but continued mopping the floor.
I've always known you to be quite strict.
That's one way of looking at it.
Just make sure she stays on your good side.
I'm not feeling very well.
Oh no! Do you think it was something you ate?
It might be, I had the chicken. What did you have? Are you ill?
I had the fish and I feel fine.
Oh, man, I think I might have gotten food poisoning from the chicken at the wedding.
Stay hydrated and good luck!
I felt a funny feeling after the dinner at the wedding.
Could it be the chicken entree that you had for dinner.
Actually, I think it is the chicken entree.
Yeah, it seemed to me that it was a bit uncooked so I didn't finish it.
Oh man, I feel really ill after eating it, that must be it.
You should go lay down for a little while before you get really sick.
I hope she hurries up with my food it all looked so good
what all did you order for us?
I got us a burger and some brown fries with a side of coleslaw
That sounds so delicious and I cant wait
I was annoyed during lunch today.
I thought you went to a good restaurant for lunch.
Yeah, I ordered a burger and fries with a side of coleslaw.
What happened?
The waitress brought the burger and fries with tomato sauce. I hate that sauce.
Sorry to hear that. I hope you corrected your order.
I placed the order with the waitress before you got here.
What did you get?
A burger, fries and coleslaw.
Do you mind sharing some of the sides?
No problem. The portions are large here.
Cool. Let me also get a side to share.
That's the last time I'm taking Ash out.
Why? What happened?
I paid for everything and yet he seemed so ungrateful.
Maybe you should stop seeing him for a while
My husband's cooking gets better and better!
That's high praise coming from the daughter of a chef.
Well, part of it might be the fact that he surprised me with the meal. Usually it's so predictable, but he cooked something he never did before, and I had no idea I was getting it!
What a sweetheart. How much did you eat?
Two whole portions! Usually I don't even finish what's on my plate, but how can I resist lasagne? I feel so fat now!
Well you certainly don't look like it!
My husband keeps on making me so happy and surprising me at every turn!
What did he do for you this time?
He cooked me a whole meal, it was so good I had to go for seconds.
Oh really? What kind?
It was a complete three course meal.
Oh wow that is so good to do that
Have you ever had a good meal that your partner made you?
My partner can't cook! Why do you ask?
Well I got home and there it was! Steak, chips and a side salad. So good I had to have another portion
What an absolute sweetheart.
Isn't he just.
Maybe you should try the same for him.
Kai has really pushed the boundaries today!
Did he make you do too much again? 
Just because I am his friend doesn't mean I'm willing do extra work
I hope he'll make it worth your while.
Don't worry, a good attitude should pay off down the line.
Well, if not you should consider quitting.
The bus that I took was to audition for a performance part in the new Cirque du Soleil acrobatic extravaganza.
When was this?
This was last summer.
Did you get the part?
I got the part and performed three nights a week for the whole summer.
Was it just for the summer months?
So I auditioned on Sunday and I think it went really well.
What did you audition for?
It was to preform in the Cirque du Soleil acrobatic extravaganza.
Oh that is really awesome! I've been hearing about and it was pretty excited to go when it started!
Isn't it great! I can't believe I actually took the bus and went to the audition, I hope I can be a part of it.
I hope so too It would be amazing for you to actually preform there.
I can't believe I just messed this cake up.
Were you baking a cake for your sons party?
Yea I put the cake in the wrong way and now it's ruined.
I could stop by and help you out if you want?
I would really appreciate that.
Ok I'll be there in about an hour.
I ruined Lisa's birthday cake I am just so mad at myself.
Did you forget an ingredient?
No, worse, I assembled it wrong and it got all burnt and dry.
How can you make a cake the wrong way?
Just leave it to me, I am terrible at baking and managed to burn the upside down cake even with the instructions.
Don't worry, the bakery is still open and we can get her a cake there.
I really messed this cake up.
Did you follow the recipe and cook it exactly as it said?
No I did something a bit different, but I think it wasn't right.
Is it still edible?
I guess so but it doesn't look at all like a cake should, I put it in the oven the wrong way.
I think you are going to have to make another one because we can't serve that.
Remember when I told you I had to make a cake?
Yes. How did that turn out?
Well I totally goofed it up and made a giant mess and ruined the cake.
Oh man. That stinks! I am sorry it didn't work out.
It was really awful. I got so frustrated I just threw it away and didn't have any cake to take for the potluck.
Well, better luck next time. I am sure it will turn out better next time!
Can I have the number for Casey?
Is this about the product information?
Yes, that's it
Ok let me look it up
Thanks
Here you go
I need to make a phone call.
who are you going to call?
I'm going to call Casey to give her more product information.
How did you get Casey's number?
The secretary gave it to me.
They're allowed to do that?
I tried to ask the secretary for her number.
Did she give it to you?
I had to explain that Casey wanted more information about the product.
I understand that she can't just give it out.
Yeah, she finally gave it to me, it just took awhile is all.
Well that's good that you got it.
It is always so hard to get information when you need it?
What do you mean?
I am trying to help Casey make a decision on her case, but I didn't have the information I needed
What did you do to get the info?
I asked the secretary who handles her case number. She eventually gave it to me but it was a pain
I see. that sounds frustrating.
I hate city life with all the constrictions it places on me.
Could you rather live in the boring country?
Boring? Never. I enjoy camping out and being in contact and commune with nature
You are literally a wild one.
You got that right, nature is very rewarding.
Maybe I will try that out some time.
I think we should go camping this weekend, I really don't like the closeness of the city.
I need a break too, let's do it!
We need to gather up some supplies first.
We can go to Walmart and get stuff, I already have a tent we can bring.
I know a spot we can go as well, it is a place my dad used to take the family a long time ago.
We are going to have so much fun camping together.
The kids are out of hand, especially Addison.
This must have been recently.
They refused to stop their incredibly embarrassing behaviour so I gave Addison a stern telling off.
That is a little extreme, don't you think?.
I made her sacrifice her dignity.
Do that again and you may have to sacrifice your freedom.
I guess I made Addison feel uncomfortable the other day with my antics.
I heard about that. Addison said you were being terrible, and she felt offended.
I don't know what her problem is.
Addison is a very dignified person, and she hates to be put in a position where she has to give that up.
She needs to come back down to Earth and just be a real person who can laugh things off.
She probably does, but you also need to respect other people more.
Addison started it.
Both of you have been an embarrassment.
Just, shut up, you know nothing.
Yeah, I will but she refused to stop her incredibly embarrassing behavior.
I have no choice than to make Addison sacrifice her dignity to clear this mess.
After this, I will want you to stay away from her.
I had put up a do not enter sign on my door for Halloween.  When I saw my friends, I let them into my room.
What did you with your friends?
We played games.  We are serious gamers.
Fun times.
I have different gaming stations in my room so we can all play at the same time.
Do you guys play the same game?
I'm so glad my friends were able to come over for Halloween.
Didn't you have a sign on your door that said do not enter?
Yes, but when I saw my friends I allowed them to enter.
What did you guys end up doing?
We watched scary movies and ate candy.
That sounds like a really great time!
I can't come over tonight.
Do you have other plans?
I have a huge test tomorrow that I've been studying for all day.
Don't you think you should take a break tonight and relax?
No, I'm staying in my room and will continue to study all night.
Ok, good luck on your test tomorrow.
I goofed off all semester.
You and me too sister.
I have a huge test tomorrow.
So that's why you are at your desk.
I spent the whole day and night studying in my room.
I will leave you to your studies.
This test tomorrow will determine my final grade.
I hope you've been studying.
I've spent the entire day and night studying.
You should pass with no problems.
I just need to get some sleep.
Go to bed early tonight.
I have a huge test tomorrow.
You need to study today.
I will spent the whole day and night studying.
You need to study in your room.
Tell them not to disturb me.
I will put a note on your door.
I'm finally done for good.
You've been locked up in the dark for like weeks.
It was only one night
It seem like it was weeks though.
I have to get a good grade on this exam so I had to do whatever it takes.
I understand and I support you 100%.
I am going to head over to the neighbour and take her laundry to the laundromat
you're such a nice person for helping your elderly neighbour
she always gave me candy when I was younger so I don't mind
I remember you telling me she used to give you Kit Kat bars
I'll be back in 20 minutes. I have to help my neighbour real quick.
Help her do what?
She is elderly and has trouble bending and picking things up. So I help her by vacuuming and cleaning out her cat litter.
That is really nice of you, Robin. Is she appreciative?
Of course. I just happen to have stopped by a month ago and saw her struggling so I offered my help.
I think that is commendable of you. Most people wouldn't do that now.
I enjoy helping her with her chores!
How long have you been helping Mrs. Junes?
Since I moved here 2 years ago. I like giving her rides, cleaning for her, stuff like that!
How kind to help her.
She tells me stories that I enjoy.
I'm sure she has a lot to tell.
I do love a good game of poker, but would be even better if my friends played with me
Did Austin not play with you?
I was in the middle of a game and didn't want to get distracted
Yeah but you know what he's like, he's very shy and needs to be encouraged.
Maybe next time I'll ask him
Good.
I was playing a game of poker when I noticed Austin standing by the doorway watching me.
Why was he watching you?
I guess he was too shy to ask to play.  I asked him to sit down and join us.
Did he play with you guys?
The kid is so good too. Who knew?  He kicked my ass at the game.
The quiet ones will surprise you.
Yesterday, I attended a game night for one of the clubs I'm a member of.
That sounds like fun. How was it?
There were lots of game like checkers or chess and we had decks of playing cards. I was mainly playing poker that night.
You play that game a lot. How did it go last night?
Pretty good. I noticed someone nearby watching the game. He seemed eager to play but never asked to join in.
He must have been too shy. Some times these events can be pretty intimidating.
Hey man. What are you doing?
I'm just watching the television, what are you doing?
Getting ready to play poker again, I love playing.
The game looks like fun.
I tried to get Austin involved last time but he was quite shy and just stood and watched instead.
Ah man, hopefully he'll pluck up the courage one day.
I was playing a poker game today and noticed Austin was standing in  the background!
Did he play the poker game too?
No! he was to shy to ask to play
He is such a shy person.
I'm having an awful day already!
Why so?
I have a headache and these students never listen to me or respect me.
That sounds rough.  Is there anything you can do to make it better?
I'm not sure.  I might try being more dominant and assertive.
Sounds like a good plan.  Let me know how it goes!
I have only loved one true person and would do anything for her.
I know, but you broke the wishes of the lord.
I don't care, I did what I had to.
Just you wait.
I hope nothing bad will happen.
God will punish you accordingly.
I am sorry, I must betray God to save my lover.
That is one irreversible sin.
Surely the Lord will understand?
He will only reason with you, if you reason with him.
Please, just tell me everything is going to be ok!
You've made your mind up, it's too late now. 
I had to save her. Now God is punishing me.
Why would God do such a thing?
This completely went against his wishes and I don't know why.
There must be some sort of remedy to all this madness
The only remedy is for me to leave as soon as possible.
I will miss you greatly.
The candy was right there in the living room.
You were at the Navaran's house again, I presume.
Mrs. Navaran puts out a giant bowl of candy.
I know she lets everyone take candy, but only one piece at a time.
I saw I could get more but I just wasn't sure how to go about it.
Wait until she goes into the basement to do laundry.
I need more friends.
You have enough friends that you don't have time for now.
I want a new group of friends but I don't know how to find them.
Take classes in things you're interested in, like gardening.
That's a great idea. I want to surround myself with people that like the same things I do.
Does this mean we aren't friends anymore?
I've been using these quizzes as a way of seeing progress in learning.
How did Austin get along?.
It looks as if he did pretty well, but we better review semicolons.
Ah yes, those are always a bit tricky at first. What was the rule again?
To make two sentences into one without using a conjunction, place a semicolon after the first sentence.
That's the one.
We had a test in class today, and I had a kid do so well I had to talk to him after I finished grading.
Oh really, was it a perfect score or something?
Yes, I just had to let him know that he was doing a great job learning the material.
Well that was nice of you, I bet the student appreciated the feedback.
Austin did, and I think I might start giving one on one feedback more often.
You really should, it may help you motivate your students a little more.
So guess what I did recently?
What is that?
I helped Tim with his homework!
I thought he thought you were a bad person.
Well, I showed him. I was a friend today.
That you did.
I don't know, we've always had that competition between us but when he fell down in the race, I just had to stop and help him.
It was the right thing to do. That leg cramp looked painful.
Yeah, he could barely even stand on it. But now Tim's been really nice and decent towards me so I guess we're cool.
I heard him call you his friend yesterday!
We're grabbing lunch together tomorrow. It's weird.
But it's a good thing. You'll make better friends than foes.
Bailey assigned me as the class head today.
That's exciting, I knew she would, you're the mot responsible person in class.
Thanks, I kind knew she would too.
Did she tell you?
Yeah, like last week, I just decided not to say anything.
That was probably a good idea, I heard another classmate is upset because she wanted to be the class head.
Bailey placed me as the head of class today, never really regarded myself as a responsible person.
But you are responsible and get great grades as well Taylor.
I am so flattered, I don't know what to say!
You don't have to say anything!
That was interesting.
Bailey thinks your a responsible person.
Oh, so that's why she put me at the head of the classroom.
Yes.
Makes more sense now.
Clearly he must trust you as well.
In the end, I was the one who gave Austin a lift
How did it go?
Yeah not terrible, he lives in a rough neighbourhood though.
Yeah thank God Austin hasn't mixed with the wrong people.
I know right, I hope he moves out soon, and gets his own car!
He needs a license first.
What a stressful day this has been.
Did you manage to give Austin a ride to his job?
Yeah, I was on my way there and got stuck in traffic for like half an hour.
Oh no, did he make it in time?
No, his manager ended up telling him off and now I feel bad.
Ah, but it's not your fault there's cars on the road.
The emergency room was really crowded yesterday.
I hope you are coping well with everything.
There were so many traumatic cases I cried over my beer at the bar.
Did the bartender give you any comfort?
No, and I would not expect them to know what to say in such a situation.
Did it surprise you how fast you started crying in public?
I had the worst few days ever, mate.
I can only imagine the daily stress of being an emergency room doctor.
It just sucks because I keep seeing all of these patients suffer in front of me.
Don't cry, okay? Have you ever considered perhaps going to therapy?
It's ok, I just have a good old cry over a beer and forget about it.
I did think I saw you in the pub the other day after all, let me know if you need my help.
I don't think I can cope with the stress of the emergency room anymore!
How did you unwind after such a day?
Yes after a difficult day as an emergency room doctor, I went to the pub and cried over a beer.
Ohhh! that is sad
It will take a little time but I'm sure I'll get through it.
Yes, take care of yourself now.
Life is too stressful these days and today's events underscored that.
I'm sorry to hear that you're not doing so well. How have you been handling this?
I went to the bar, got drunk and ended up crying over my beer.
That's not a good way to handle things. You should have just went to home to get some rest.
In the emergency room today I was overwhelmed with many patients. I've never been so stressed in my life.
You are an emergency room doctor so you have something to feel proud about. Instead of wallowing in pity, feel good about what you've done.
I have always liked Addison.
Did you finally ask her out?
Yes I did. It was then she told me that she loved me too.
How sweet.
She made me so happy.
I am so glad to hear that.
I can't believe that my crush actually said she loves me.
You are living a fairy tale ending, I am happy for you.
We have been friends for a long time and you know how happy this is making me right now.
I know, you and Addison have been friends for years and I honestly saw this coming a long time ago.
Really? You always thought we'd end up together?
Yeah, the chemistry between you guys is insane.
Guess what I did?
What did you do Quinn?
I went to their business meeting to get an a clear perspective of current projects status.
Interesting, how'd that go?
I attended the meeting.
I did see you.
I was there to check on the project and to get updates as well.
It was a very informative meeting.
I was glad I attended it.
It was worth the trouble.
Work was slow today.
What did you do to pass the time?
I played a game on my phone.
Well, that sounds like fun.
It was. I got the highest score of the day.
Congratulations!
I hit a milestone today!
Did you get that big promotion at work?
No, nothing that amazing. Think smaller!
You finally got Deborah to go out with you?
No, even smaller. I got a high score on that game on my phone that I've been obsessed with.
Well, that is much smaller but a small congrats is still in order!
I love video games.
I know you do.
I played one on my phone yesterday.
Are you good at this game?
I got the high score on the game that day.
You see, practice does make perfect.
I'm so happy to be back at work today
where were you yesterday?
I was actually out sick
I see, I hate when I get sick on a Monday
Yeah it throws off my whole week
I hope you feel much better Quinn
I was sick Monday.
Did you go to work?
No, I called in, but I finally went to work today.
So, how are you feeling?
I probably should have stayed home another day.
Better get home and rest.
Hey I have that TPS report you asked for.
Oh, thanks. Say, I heard you were sick yesterday.
Yea, I was sick as a dog. I feel better now though.
I'm glad you're better. Otherwise you wouldn't have been able to finish my TPS reports!
I felt so bad Monday I couldn't make it work, I had to call out.
What was wrong?
I had the worse stomach ache ever!
Oh no I hope it passed quickly?
Thank God it did, I was able to make it to work on Tuesday.
Good, I am sure the boss man appreciated that.
I literally was awake the whole night.
Why's that?
This job interview had me twisting and turning all damn night.
Don't worry, relax you got this
Hopefully, it could have gone better but we'll see.
Nothing like going to a job interview looking like death warmed over.
How did the interview go?
I don't really know. I apologized for looking like I was hungover. She laughed.
That's a good sign. She has a sense of humour.
Yeah, we'll see. She's supposed to decide Friday.
I don't think Quinn and I are friends anymore.
What happened between you guys?
Everything was fine until I started dating Quinn's girlfriend.
Did Quinn get mad?
Quinn never said anything to me, but I could tell by the way he acted towards me that she wasn't happy about it.
Well as long as you are happy that's all that matters.
I think I've made a big mistake and now I regret it.
Yes, I mean you shouldn't really date your friend's girlfriend.
I know, Quinn seemed pretty mad.
Yeah, I agree and you were good friends before that so it's a big problem.
Let's catch up over some coffee sometime and I can tell you more.
I would love to do this, we should catch up!
Our kids were running wild everywhere inside and outside the house, so I stepped in and told them they needed to take a break.
Sometimes kids do not know when to stop or take a breather.
Dawn and I have four kids and our friends brought their kids, so that's six kids in our small house.
They can be a handful.
They also give me so much joy, but I am exhausted sometimes.
They have endless energy.
I love Dawn, but she won't discipline our children and I'm always having to step in and be the bad guy.
Did something happen?
Yeah, our children were running wild in the store today. It was so embarrassing. I had to get them under control.
It's probably harder if you're having to do it all the time.
My kids aren't the most well-behaved children in the world.
That's how most children are.
No, it's getting worst. I had to step in and take control of them last night.
What did you do?
I turned off all electronics and made them go to bed without ice cream.
I didn't want to leave the amusement park.
Then why did you leave?
I threw a fit but my mom made us leave.
I'll go with you next week and we can stay all day.
That would be a lot of fun.
Not going to lie, I can't think of anything worse than doing your homework.
That doesn't really give you the right to copy other people though does it?
I mean, Alex should just let me copy so that I don't get in trouble
But then you won't learn anything?
Yeah but I'm not too bothered, I'll never be any good at algebra.
That's too bad. 
I just checked the battery in Aubrey's watch.
Does it have any power left?
No, it's completely dead.
So what are you going to do?
I think I'm just going to buy her a new watch as a gift.
She's going to love that.
Do you happen to know what time it is?
Don't you have Aubrey's watch? Look for yourself.
Aubrey's watch is dead. The battery's kaput.
Let me look at my cell phone's clock. It says it's 11:45.
Thanks.
I thought being in charge of the prom committee would be a lot more fun.
It's never easy to be the person that has to make the tough decisions.
I was just surprised how many people complained about something while I was explaining how the events were organized.
Just remember that you were in charge, but it was a group decision.
I know, I just feel like people will blame me if they aren't happy.
Well, your friends and most people support you so you need to focus on that!
I never knew Kai was so loving and tender.
Has he changed recently?
Well when we first started dating, he was very shy and aloof.
And now he is getting too close?
No, no. I enjoy it. He is very loving and trusting with me now.
Oh, good. It sounds like he has opened up to you and sees a future with you.
I am the luckiest woman in the world!
Why are you the luckiest woman in the world?
Kai always opens doors for me, grabs my hand in public, and sends me romantic text messages before bed.
You deserve it after the guys you have dated in the past.
I think he has a friend that would be perfect for you if you want to try a night out with us.
I know that he is always very sweet to you, but I would rather find my own date, thanks.
You know that Kai and I have been dating now for a couple of months, right?
Yes.  So how are things going with you guys?
Things are going great.  I think Kai really likes me.  I mean, I think he REALLY, REALLY likes me!
What makes you say that?
It seems like he is going out of his way more and more to show me how affectionate he can be, like holding hands in public, touching my face, and things like that.
That is wonderful, I really hope it works out and that you guys are very happy with each other!
The noodles are cold.
Am very hungry, but can't warm it.
Same here, maybe we should place them in the microwave rather than stove.
That will be better.
But, don't forget about it.
I won't.
Did you know you could microwave noodles?
You mean something other than ramen?
Yeah, hard shell pasta, in a bowl of water, microwaved.
How did they turn out?
Soggy and floury and nothing like usual.
Are you really that pressed for extra recreation time?
I don't know what I feel like eating tonight.
What about lasagne?
I really don't feel like cooking tonight, that's kind of the thing.
Well how about making some ramen noodles?
Actually that sounds pretty good right now. I will heat some up in the microwave.
Can you heat some up for me too please?
Damn, at this dinner I had the biggest steak ever.
I love big meat.
Me too especially when its a good price and served with a side of potatoes.
Yes, I love to save.
I picked up this huge steak and potatoes on the way home.
Did you get it from that new shop on the corner.
Yeah, there is no way I am going to eat all this, do you want half?
Awe, sure! Now I don't have to cook anything!
It is too hot to cook in the kitchen.
My friend base is increasing steadily!
Who has just walked in on your friend list  Ash
I was at the mall yesterday and I met a group of surfers. We exchanged contacts and now my new friends are asking me to join them at the beach today
Whoa you are so lucky
Aren't I just? I'm so happy
Well, Godspeed Ash
I just made some new friends at the hobby store.
You look like you're really happy.
I am. It's great to know that they like me too.
Are you going to hang out there a lot?
Definitely. Having friends that have the same hobby is great.
I don't mind being your friend even though you hate my hobbies.
I found new friends today.
Good for you.
They seem nice.
I guess they like you too.
Yes, the feeling is mutual.
You guys enjoy each other.
I made new friends up at college already.
Oh that's great. It's so hard to meet all new people.
They seem to like me back and I bet it's because we are all new.
Right, that will make you all bond I bet.
It's going to be a nice group to go to class with.
Keep me posted. I bet you will have great times to talk about.
So what did you think about Jen coming to the bar last night?
She hasn't changed much. Still as shallow as ever.
I was thinking the same thing. And she ordered like twenty-two drinks for herself!
I'm not surprised she started her own business...and has an alcohol problem, don't ever become like that Casey.
I'll try not to. That made me feel better about myself at least.
Same here. All her boasting was a bit much.
Went to the bar for the first time in a while yesterday, it was wild.
What did you get up to?
Well this new place opened and I thought it might be a good idea to rekindle with an old friend.
Is that it?
Well, let's just say I could barely stand by the end of the night.
I met my old friend at a bar last night.
Who's your old friend?
Alex, do you remember him?
Is he the guy who joined the marines after high school?
He's out now.  He went overseas for years.
I am happy he made it home.  How is he?
I'm so glad I could get together with my old friend tonight.
I know, it just gets harder and harder to make the time for people. But I'm happy you made it work.
Definitely. We caught up on so many old memories.
It's always great to reminiscence about school times, back when you were irresponsible teenagers.
Yeah, I've been missing these stories.
I bet.
I went to the zoo this weekend. I think I saw every exhibit.
Didn't that take a long while?
It took the whole day but I wanted to see every animal they have. I love animals.
Me too and that zoo takes good care of them.
They do, so the animals look so nice and healthy as well.
That's a fun way to spend the weekend.
I really love animals.
I know, I've noticed.
Last week I went to the zoo.
What animals did you like to see?
I saw everything, from mammals to reptiles! I love to see many different animals.
My favourites are the elephants.
I hadn't seen elephants that big since the last time I went to DC zoo.
How can you tell how big elephants are? They all look the same.
I know but you can look at the ones in DC zoo and see how much bigger their trunks are.
I guess. You've always loved going to the zoo.
I have. I always wonder what the animals think of us.
Probably that we are as strange as them.
I would have loved to keep talking, but I had to finish getting ready.
Did you end up getting there on time?
Yeah, but I was running late today.
How the heck did you manage to clock in at 9 then?
I ended up getting a taxi, bit of a bummer.
That sucks, that's like half you daily wage gone.
It's been hard.  So much work goes into leading an entire military force.
That's massive. You are a fearless leader.
I think that's why the army promoted me.
They have faith in you to lead the force to victory and to do the right thing.
Doing the right thing isn't always so easy.
I am sure so much goes into every decision.
I think its time.
What do you mean?
Its time to take what is ours and finally rule this world.
Are you sure we are ready.
Yes, I have amassed the largest military force the world has ever seen.
That is a good reason, I will draw up the game plan.
It feels good being the leader.
Yeah you seem to have no fear.
This military is huge so I feel safe making decisions.
That's cool.
This was fun hanging with Quinn's friends.
Sure was, you should've stayed out a little longer.
I can't, I had work early in the morning.
Oh ok, next time then.
Damn I wanted this new sweater but it was too pricey.
Maybe you can find one cheaper.
Already have, found it on sale!
Awesome
I've been checking out this new sweater for a couple of weeks now but it was too expensive.  I found it on sale.
Did you buy it?
I haven't yet.  I am trying to be good with my money.  I really want it but do I really need it?
Is it another cardigan?
How did you guess?
You have cardigans in every single colour in your closet.
Check it out, I finally bought that sweater I wanted!
Wasn't it hundreds of dollars? Why did you spend so much on a sweater?
I actually found the item on sale for half off.
Score!
My god Bailey is such a push over! Can't take a joke.
Maybe you should be a bit more careful with the way you treat him.
Doesn't seem to be working.
Just take his feelings in consideration.
Well that's just kinda boring.
You need help.
I can be a jerk sometimes.
What did you do now?
I kept teasing Bailey until he had a fit and stormed off.
Do you feel bad about what you did?
Not in the least.
You are a jerk sometimes.
I was so nervous about that job! I'm glad I could guess Jordan's opinion.
It seems like you did really well.
That's good! It's what I was going for.
Jordan seemed to be very happy with the outcome.
I hope so, he's the one who hired me after all!
Well I hope it goes well for you from now on.
That was a great party.
Yeh, happy fifteenth!
Thank you, very much.
I really liked the cookies and ice cream.
Me too, but my favourite was the chocolate cake.
Chocolate cake is the best.
Did you get enough to eat at my birthday party?
Oh yeah, I could not believe the amount of sweets there!
Oh I know, cookies, candy, ice cream, cake! Yum!
Which one was your favourite? I couldn't stop eating the cookies.
The chocolate cake hands down! Could not get enough of it!
I am not a huge fan of chocolate, so I will have to take your word for it.
Did you have fun at my birthday party?
Yeah, it was so much fun, the food was great.
What was your favourite out of the cookies, ice cream, and cake?
I liked the cookies, how about you?
I loved the chocolate cake the best.
Chocolate cake was my second favourite.
There isn't anything better than turning fifteen and having your dream birthday cake to top it all off!
I thought you'd like that.
it was the best cake I've had. Chocolate is the best.
I'm going to get the same when my birthday comes around.
Did you finish the book for book club yet?
I finished it last week, what about you?
I was reading it at the pool yesterday but Ash kept interrupting me to watch him do a new arm stand dive he has been practicing.
Wow, that's impressive!
Actually, he did it almost perfectly and I am really proud of him.
Good thing you put the book down, you wouldn't want to miss that.
I was relaxing by the pool reading when Ash insisted I watch him do the dive he's been working on.
So, did you watch him?
Of course. And he really did well.
That's great.  Is he going to use it in competition?
That's the goal, he's been working really hard on that dive.
Let me know when he'll be competing with it, I want to see it.
I feel bad for the kids
Why do you feel bad for the kids?
I heard there won't be any Christmas gifts for them
What are you going to do about that?
I think I will get them each a lovely gift
Wow, that would put a smile on their face
I heard the kids won't get any gifts.
What? Really, It sucks.
I will give them gifts myself instead.
You are too good.
I want to be their Santa for Christmas.
They will surely be happy.
I was in need of a big healthy breakfast this morning.
What did you cook?
I made some hard-boiled eggs.
What is so special about it?
I made a lot of them!
I guess you're right, big in quantity, and yes very healthy.
I did something a little different for breakfast.
What did you end up having?
Thought I would be healthy today. I made hard-boiled eggs, trying to improve my protein intake, you see.
Nice.
Good Morning, I just had a very healthy breakfast with hard-boiled eggs, toast, and avocados!
Don't eggs have a lot of cholesterol in them?
Yes, but cholesterol is very good for you, it is the building block of your hormones.
I though high cholesterol was bad?
High cholesterol is a sign of inflammation in the body. Think of cholesterol as the firefighter and inflammation as the fire. You need cholesterol and need to fix inflammation.
Wow, thanks for that info, I will gladly search for more information regarding that.
I feel like a horrible friend after taking Bri to the dance.
Why, her dad was happy you did.
But he trusted me with his daughter. Especially, when he was laid up in the hospital.
What happened that you feel guilty?
Well, she was getting picked on so I stepping in and spoke to the bullies. I think I made it worse though.
You did the right thing, I'm sure Bri really appreciated the help!.
I can't believe I got the job as an elephant rider.
Those are some big animals.
I've seen them attack people and hurt them really bad.
You need to be careful as we don't want you to become injured.
I would certainly not be good.
Lee is a legend regardless for getting you that job.
Lee always know how to lift my spirits up, he just appointed me assigned me to be an elephant rider.
That sounds like a really fun job. Where will you be working?
We are both working at the circus that arrived last week.
Enjoy yourself as much as you can.
I mean to. It is not very often that a circus comes to this town.
Will it be open on Saturday? I would love to come down there.
I think I may have to break up with my boyfriend.
Why? I thought you guys were hitting if off pretty good.
We ran into a homeless guy on the sidewalk, I pulled some money out of my wallet and my boyfriend freaked out.
You were doing a nice thing. Why did it make him mad?
He thinks they're all lazy, it made me mad that he was so callous. I don't like him much right now.
I understand. I don't either.
I did a good deed today, kind of want it to be a daily thing.
What did you do?
I gave one of those beggars in town a bit of spare change, my boyfriend threw a fit in front of everyone!
That's so out of order, who does he think he is!
Maybe he's showing his true colours at last!
Today my husband and I saw a homeless beggar under the bridge, he didn't want me to give him money.
Well, sometimes the beggars use the money for things they shouldn't.
I know, but this guy looked so hungry so I gave him money out of my husbands wallet.
Was he mad at you for doing that?
Yes, he is still mad. I did it out of pure kindness, and I felt so bad for the man.
Just explain that to your husband and I'm sure he has a reason he didn't want you to give him the money.
I am so mad.
What's up with you?
Me and my girlfriend were walking downtown and all of a sudden she snapped when I gave a homeless guy change
Why would she react like that? So uncalled for
Well she said there's no point in giving them money as it all goes on alcohol.
As much as it does happen, it's not always true. These people are struggling everyday.
Students can be so disrespectful.
How were the students disrespectful?
They kept throwing balls while I was teaching.
What did you do about it?
I sent them to the principal's office, the kids have to know that's unacceptable when they're supposed to be studying.
Hopefully everyone learned not to misbehave.
Kids can sure make you want to tear your hair out. I had some kids throwing balls during class.
So what did you end up doing?
I sent them to the principal's office. I made an example of them to the others who were supposed to be studying.
I would have been so angry.
I was but I kept calm, called the office and sent them down there.
I honestly had no idea what to get her so I had to ask
Sometimes it's best to get advice, especially if you don't know the person that well.
I hope she likes it.
I think she will. I remember her pointing it out to us.
To be honest I told her that it was a suggestion, but she was just happy that I got her something.
You're too generous.
Tripp loved the gift I was told about. I gave it to him last night
You got him the watch?
Yeah, I told him about it being suggested. He said to tell thank you to Mary.
I saw him looking very happy when he opened it. That was sweet of you to get it.
I have failed two tests this semester.  Maybe I should put in more effort.
That helps.  Maybe don't play so much on video games.
I do spend almost all my free time online playing games.
I know they are fun and all but everything in moderation is what I follow.
You are the wise one.
I am trying to get by in life.
I didn't work very hard in school and I failed some classes.
Did you eventually graduate?
I did, but I didn't get into any good colleges.
Are you trying harder now in your community college classes?
Yes, and I hope I can transfer later.
That sounds like a good plan.
I have to find out why I'm not motivated in this team work.
That's so unlike you. Why don't you think you're motivated?
I don't know but this lack of effort is causing my group to fail. We've failed the first part of the assignment that we submitted.
Is it just you lacking in effort?
Yeah. I think everybody else is pulling their weight.
Well do they care? Because somebody could pick up the effort you lack.
I just wanted another swig of the vodka before I drive home from the party.  That was good stuff.
You already had too much to drink, didn't you?
When you left, it was already too much.  Then I kept drinking.
Do you know when to stop?
No, I don't.  I drink until I pass out.
That's not healthy.
Can you drive me over to Mike's later, I need to get my car.
Why is your car at Mike's.
I went over there for a birthday party for his cousin and got wasted.
I guess its good you didn't get behind the wheel.
Once I realized I was too drunk to drive, I just had another drink and then took a taxi home.
Smart move, I'll be happy to drive you over there.
I finally got my new iPhone, but it was not easy.
You look really tired! Were you up all night?
They released the phone at midnight, so I didn't get any sleep. Worse, there was a long line.
I would have gone home and bought the phone another day.
Yeah, well, I was really determined!
I'm sorry I'm home so late.
Where were you at?
I was at the store to get a new iPhone.
There must have been a lot of people for that.
There was a big crowd there already even though I arrived at 10 PM. I had to wait a few hours.
Is there any way I can have your old iPhone?
I am not afraid to speak the truth.
Sometimes you need to lie a little.
What do you mean?
Like if you burp, and don't want people to know it was you.
Nope.  I'm fine with telling the truth.
You really are truthful.
I have been single for a while.
I guess it is time to find  someone.
I asked a classmate out because I like him.
Is he single?
He was once married and has 3 small kids.
Are you ready for that, just in case?
I had a very bad experience at a restaurant today.
What happened?
I waited a very long time before my dinner arrived. I was so sick to my stomach.
I hope you gave them a bad review online?
No I haven't.
You should, to protect other customers.
I hate the new restaurant delivery services.
Did you get your food late this time again?
I had to wait a long time to get dinner.
I'm so sorry about that.
I was so sick to the stomach by the time it finally arrived.
Please take good care.
I am starving, been sitting here an hour already.
Yeah, we been here a long time.
My stomach is starting to hurt, don't think Ill be able to eat.
Dang, what a waste of time sitting here.
Lets get it to go as soon as they bring it out, we will ask for boxes.
Sounds like a plan this is crazy I kind of want to just leave.
Man, I felt so bad for Skylar the other day. Had to sit down with her to talk.
Was she having personal problems?
Yeah. She was crying and very upset.
Well. lucky you were there for her.
Well, I knew I had to stick around. I never want to leave a friend in need.
That's why we're friends. You always do the right thing when chips are down for other people. I admire you for that!
Sometimes people just need help, you know.
I heard you were really supportive with Skylar, she's going through a rough patch.
Yeah, she was fired from her job and her dog died in the same week.
That's really tough, I hope she feels better soon.
Skylar was really upset today.
Do you know what she was so upset about?
I had no idea. I just saw her crying so I sat down with her.
What did she say?
A family friend had just died. I was busy but I spent time just talking to her.
You're a good friend.
I had a terrible day today. The guys in the neighbourhood were playing football but didn't invite me.
I'm sorry, maybe they'll invite you next time. They probably had enough guys for now.
Doesn't matter. I decided to paint a picture instead. It was nice while I was doing it but I'm mad again.
Let me see the picture you painted. I love painting - next time I'll paint with you.
I think I need some new friends.
What's wrong with the ones you have now?
Yesterday they went to play football and did not invite me.
That's cold of them. How did you handle it?
I decided to make my own fun and painted a beautiful picture.
Good for you. Just remember I am always here for you.
I know Kendall is going love this birthday party for her.
I saw that you have been decorating for hours before the party.
Yes, and I made so many streamers for the party.
This looks so good and I think it will be a memorable birthday, for sure!
Can't wait to see Kendall's reaction, she's not gonna see this coming.
If she doesn't appreciate it, I don’t know what to say.
Kendall is going to be so surprised!
How can I help with the decorating?
Over there on the counter in the kitchen are more balloons and ribbon...do you mind blowing up balloons and hanging them from the ceiling?
I suggest leaving the blown up balloons on the floor to float.
If we have enough, I want to cover her bedroom floor with them, too.
She is going to be so surprised! Great idea!
I decorated Kendall's house.
You did it for hours.
I need to do it quickly.
The guest started to arrive.
Good thing I finished on time.
Kendall was very happy.
I helped Kendall decorate her house for the party.
It looks great, did you pick out all the streamers and stuff?
No Kendall did, she has a good eye for design. I just hung things up.
Well you guys both did a really incredible job.
Thanks! I'll let Kendall know!
It's hard to express in words what I am thinking so I have to draw pictures for people.
How do people respond to the pictures?
They understand me better I think.  I have a speech impediment so it's just hard for me to express my feelings.
That's good you are able to communicate through pictures.
I express my emotions through pictures and colours.  Sometimes I am just feeling a certain colour.
As long as you get the message across, that's what counts.
So we are doing this new communication exercise.
The one where you draw pictures?
Yes. That one. It is a good way to express feelings.
What if someone hands back a blank canvas?
That's like modern art. It means a lot, don't you think?
It means they have no clothes.
I don't know what came over me.
What do you mean, you were just a jerk.
I just let my anger get the best of me.
Stop making excuses and just own it.
I'm trying my best, give me a break.
You're just making excuses for tripping someone and ending up hurting their ankle.
Hey, do you remember last week when we all went to the basketball game?
Sure I do.  That was a really great game.  That's the one that got us into the finals.
Yep.  It was such a good game and I was having such a good time, I left my brand new North Face jacket in the bleachers when we left!
Oh, no!  Not the cool blue one with the padding!
Yeah, that's the one.  That was my favourite jacket, and now I have to go get a new one.  You want to go to the sporting goods store with me right now and lets pick out new jackets?
Sure I do!  I saved enough money to get my own North Face jacket, too!
Lets head to the store so I can pick up a few things for the party.
Sure, what did you want to get?
Maybe some extra wine and some cheeses would be good
That sounds like a great idea to me
I was at that Indian restaurant in the Hills last night, wow it was so good!
Oh I have been wanting to go, is the food spicy?
The food was perfectly spicy, not overdone, we really enjoyed our food
That is awesome, do you need to make a reservation, I want to go!
Yes, Bill called two days prior, any seating is good, the entire atmosphere was very pleasant
I am glad you guys enjoyed your night out, I can not wait to try it out
I went to a great restaurant last night.
How was it?
I really enjoyed it a lot. I got the lobster.
Wow, that's really expensive.
I wasn't the one paying for the meal.
No wonder you thought it was so great.
I've had chronic fatigue syndrome for quite some time now
What is that exactly?
It's where you get tired for no real reason and more than the average person.
I never knew you had that, though I noticed sometimes you would be tired.
I didn't know it either really. I found out just a month ago but I've had it long before that.
Yes of course, I remember on back to when we were a bit younger and sometimes you would fall down.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to go on the hike.
Are you serious? I was only going because you said you were going.
Yeah, but I can't predict when my condition is going to flare up. I'm sorry.
No, it's not your fault. I'm just disappointed, that's all.
Well, let me get a quick nap and then see how I'm feeling.
Okay. Rest up. Hopefully you'll be okay when you get up!
I cannot wait until I finish school and have my own classroom.
How much more time do you have left?
A couple years still, but working with Addison I have learned a lot.
She is a good mentor.
I know. I really have learned a ton from her, she just comes across as very chill
It is going to feel so good when you finish school and have your own room.
That sandwich was delicious.
I cant believe you ate the whole thing.
Yeah, I got the two footer thinking I'd have dinner and lunch tomorrow
You sure you don't have tapeworm
Very funny, I'm just starving, been working so much  I feel like I haven't eaten in days
Yeah, you earned it. I haven't seen you eat in weeks
I'm so full from lunch.
What did you eat?
It was this huge sandwich, it stuffed me, I may not even eat dinner.
Sounds like it was a good sandwich.
Have you hear that Sasha left the company today?
No, I hadn't heard about that. Did she find a new job?
No, she was going to be fired but she resigned, instead.
Why were you going to fire her?
She was doing all kinds of things. Fudging her expense report, paying people to do her job, making up stats for the meetings.
Well, I guess her leaving was a good thing, then.
I was forced to go to corporate because Sasha, who is one of my employees, was involved in corruption.
Oh wow. Did they fire her?
No. She resigned in my office.
Sounds like you were right about the corruption. She wouldn't have resigned otherwise.
Yeah. I had absolute proof. I really didn't think she was capable of doing those things.
How sad. I can't believe people do these things.
I told Jan about my idea earlier.
What did she say?
She wasn't too sure about it.
But it is a good plan, did you convince her otherwise?
I think I did, after I explained it to Jan, she thought it was a good idea.
Jan is pretty reasonable, so I'm not that surprised. Congratulations!
I convinced Jan that I had good idea for a business. I think it's a good one.
What's the idea?
To rethink the baby bottle.  I've just had a kid so I'm seeing opportunities in baby bottles.
So you're going to make a baby bottle?
We've been working on a design for a while.
Good luck to you both.
I thought it would be fun to go skydiving with Jan
Did Jan like your idea?
Not at first, but I can be very persuasive when I have my mind set on something
So did Jan agree to go?
Yes, we went last weekend and had a great time.
Sounds awesome, next time invite me too.
So nobody wanted to play with me.
I'll play with you. What game?
Heads I win. Tails you lose.
I think I'll read a book instead.
What book?
Catch 22.
I just ended up going home.
Why, did you have fun with everyone?
I felt kind of excluded from everyone. No one really talked to me.
You should have found me, I would have hung out with you!
Yeah, I couldn't find you and didn't want to bother you.
You wouldn't be bothering me at all!
I hope Austin likes this essay I wrote.
What's the essay about?
I was assigned the history of England.
Did you learn a lot during your research?
Yeah, England has a fascinating history.
If you enjoyed writing the essay then you'll get a good grade.
I had a very low grades.
That should be as a result of you not coming to school regularly!
Yes! when I got the grades back, my parents grounded me.
What is your punishment?
I would not go on the trip!
You should work harder next time!
You know I was trying to avoid a car payment, but my car broke down again. I think I am going to have to get something new.
What sort of vehicle are you looking for?
I am not sure. Something affordable and fuel-efficient.
I might be able to help you with that. I know a guy with a small car lot.
That would be great! My car is totally done for and I need something new soon!
No problem. Let me talk to him and I will get back to you tomorrow.
My old car is breaking down. I need to buy a new one.
What are you buying, have you decided yet?
I've been checking out a couple of cars, but I haven't decided yet.
Do you want big car, like a truck or a smaller one like that convertible you've been telling me about?
That's the thing. I need them both really, but I can only afford one.
You should go for some test drives.
It was time to get rid of Daisy.
Daisy was there for a lot of memories.
She was there but lately she's been breaking down a lot.
I know, Daisy needed to be put out to get scrapped.
I can't wait to meet the new car
You're going to absolutely love it.
So I decided between the Dodge and the Chevy, I chose the Dodge!
I didn't even know you were in the market for a car
I wasn't until lately, my car was breaking down like every other dang day
Oh man, well I'm glad you found a new one that you like!
I am so excited, this Dodge has great reviews and it's gorgeous
Yay sounds like a road trip is in order, shotgun!
I hate this old beat-up dump.
What's the matter Aubrey?
I keep having car trouble.
Maybe you should get a new car. A four wheel drive truck or a new sports Sedan would make you look like a new person.
I'm not sure I can afford it. But this old Honda is always breaking down.
Hey, would you rather shell out the cash or risk breaking down every time you go out?
I had to make a really difficult decision.
What was the decision in regards to?
Well unfortunately Jan lost her job and hence couldn't pay her rent.
Oh no, that's unfortunate.
Yeah I had to ask her to move out.
That's a hard decision, but you have to do what you have to do.
I feel terribly about it, but I have to be realistic. I am a landlord, after all.
I know, but Jan lost her job. What's she supposed to do?
I don't know. But what am I supposed to do with a tenant that can't pay rent?
Couldn't you have given her a little more time? She would have worked it out.
I have bills to pay. My responsibilities don't magically go away if my tenants can't pay.
I understand. I just feel really badly for her. She's in a terrible spot.
I feel like a rat.
That doesn't surprise me.
Jan couldn't pay the rent because she lost her job.
So you kicked her out?
Yes, I made her move out anyway.
You are a rat.
This is probably the worst part about my job.
What did you do about Jan?
I needed the rent money and she couldn't provide it, so I had to kick her out.
That's kind of cruel, man.
I can't cover her and support her, this isn't charity.
I just thought better of you, Lee.
Hey, so Mrs. Smith helped me organise the prom. Should be a good time!
Ah yes! She's great with that sort of stuff, what do you have to do now?
We have to get all of our suits and dresses together and book in with hairdressers and beauticians.
Great, I'm sure you guys will look the part.
I'm going to the prom with Betty. I'm really excited about it.
I'm glad you finally asked her.
I had to before any other guy did. And I've already talked to her mom.
How about her dad? Did you talk to him, too.
No, there's only her mom. She's really nice and I think she's glad I'm dating Betty.
Lee's mum is really an expert on these big events, she's helped me organise it.
I was so proud of you taking this on!
Well, I just have responsibilities now that I've graduated and are part of the committee
You've certainly come a long way since high school. What's the theme going to be?
I would love to tell you, but it's a surprise!
Oh come on Carson! You know I won't tell anyone..
We did it! its working great.
You got the results back?
Yes, the new drug has increased the chance of survival by 95%.
That is amazing, your work has paid off.
It sure has, we will save so many lives with this.
I cant wait to get it out to the public.
My new drug is a success.
Has that been proven?
Yes. Research results are in and they show that the drug has improved survival rates in patients.
That's fantastic!
Yeah, I'm really happy about it.
It must be good to know all your hard work paid off.
Hey, good news! The results are in!
Oh my god, did it work?
Yes! Official trials show that the survival rate doubled in patients who didn't get the placebo.
Wow! That's amazing. We were originally aiming for a 50% increase, weren't we?
Yeah, that's why these results are so incredible.
Once we get cleared for market, this is really going to change the treatment landscape. Well done Addison!
I needed to borrow money.
Rent is so important.
I'm behind it.
You'll be alright, just hold tight.
Okay, it's just a rough patch I suppose.
You'll only be stronger once it's over.
I had to borrow money from my parents for rent this month.
That's bad. Are you having money problems?
Yeah, I lost my job a few days ago, but I was already struggling.
I'm sorry to hear that. What are you going to do?
Probably try to find another job. Maybe I'll start driving for Uber, I need to figure out something.
Damn! How the hell did I pull that off?
What? You got full score? I thought you didn't study
I didn't! It was mostly guessing
Either that or some form of cheating..
I know I'm lazy, but I'm definitely no cheat!
Whatever, I just wouldn't test your luck like that on the next one.
I have no idea how this happened.
Are you sure you didn't have the answers before hand?
No way, I would've sold them if I did.
I wish I was like you an able to get 100 on my math test without studying.
Like I said, I was very lucky.
Lucky is better than not being lucky and getting a bad grade.
I am happy, I just got a 100 on the test today
Wow, that's impressive!
Yeah I did it right
I guess you studied a lot and prepared  for the test, right?
No, I did not study at all.
Oh wow, now that is impressive!
How'd you do on that test?
I got a 84, I'm pretty disappointed because I studied a lot.
Oh dang, I didn't study at all.
What did you get?
100...
I hate you.
So today I met with Carson to discuss our new business opportunity.
How did it go?
Not well, I don't think he was interested.
Why not?
He kept trying to tell me to go away and to leave him alone after I told him my proposal.
Well, his loss I guess.
I met up with Carson earlier today.
What was it all about?
It was about a business opportunity that I want him to get involved in.
So is he interested?
Yeah, he's going to be investing in the business.
It's a good thing you didn't ask me. I have no money.
I wanted to talk to Carson about a great business opportunity, so I met up with him in person.
Where'd the two of you meet?
Just at that coffee shop over on Main Street.
Did your meeting go well?
Yes, he was really interested. I'm going to pull the financials together and we're going to meet again next week.
Let me know how it goes after you meet again.
So I just had lunch with Carson.
Oh yeah, what did you guys talk about?
I showed him a business opportunity that I have been working on.
Okay cool. What was his response?
He seemed interested so we are going to move forward together.
Very nice! Congratulations. I with you the best.
I need to measure Addison's body proportions so I can make some new garments.
How?
I'm going to put some cloth on Addison's hips so we can make her some fresh clothes.
This should be interesting to watch.
I have to help my Uncle Remy.
Why is that?
I'm the executor of his estate.
That's a lot of responsibility.  Why does he need one?
He's getting a bit senile.  Most of the time he is all right, but there are times he might buy the Golden Gate Bridge.
At least, you probably won't do that.
I wrote an article that was based on Riley's work.
That sounds very interesting.
In the article I gave the reader a deeper interpretation.
On what did you focus?
I was able to give a thorough analysis of Riley's perspective.
Riley was hands on during this period.
I had written an article about Riley's perspective.
I didn't know you write articles?
I have been and I love doing it.
I am yet to read your work.
I will bring you a copy of what I wrote.
I appreciate that, cool.
My article comes out today so make sure you read it.
I definitely want to. I'll be sure to buy a copy of the magazine.
Thanks. I think I did Riley justice with the article, her perspective rings loud and clear, I think.
Knowing you, you made sure you got everything.
I think it's a pretty thorough analysis.
I wrote another article through Riley's perspective
That seems intense! She went through such an ordeal
Yeah I got a first hand interview and I'm grateful for it.
I cant wait to read it when is it out?
Tomorrow
Awesome
I hope I did Riley justice in the article.
I think it was a fair article.
I tried to make the analysis from Riley's perspective, I hope the readers understand that.
I think the readers will get it.
I've applied for a competitive position, Riley gave me some encouragement.
What's the position for?
I'm pursuing what I've always wanted to do, become a lawyer.
Awesome stuff, maybe one day you can represent me in court.
Don't make my life difficult if I do!
We are going to win.
I applied for a competitive position at a law firm.
Did you get the job?
I don't know yet; I told Riley I hoped for the best.
I hope you get the job.
I'm at the gym every day, it's exhausting!
Should you be exercising that often?
Physical health is important for me. The first thing I do is run for 30 minutes.
That takes a lot of dedication. I should start exercising.
I'm so exhausted from going to the gym today.
What did you do today?
I ran for 30 minutes like I always do. Then I did some weights.
You should be getting strong then, and building up your stamina!
I am. It's hard work but it's worth it.
I'm proud of you!
Honestly, at the party the other night there was too much drama with people not getting along.
I hate that. Why can't people get along? It's a party for God's sake.
I know. I just tried to get along with everyone so everyone would be in a better mood.
I know. You do well with that.
Well, I felt like I was trying to keep the peace all night, and it was annoying.
Hey you tried. Everyone was relatively calm and in a decent mood, you did your job. Don't worry about it, you're the bigger person.
I don't know if you heard, but my store closed and I lost my job.
Oh, no!  I am so sorry to hear that. Have you started looking for a new job yet?
Yes, I've been putting out resumes all over the place.
I'll keep my eyes open for you and let you know if I come across anything I think would be good for you.
Thanks, I really appreciate that.
You're very welcome. Let me know if there's anything I can do in the meantime.
I'm so upset. I loved that job so much.
Yeah, that sucks. I know you were so happy there.
I really was. What can I do though? If the store is closing, it's all over.
That's really sad. It's a shame they can't figure out a way to stay in business.
I know they tried, though. They fought hard.
I'm sure they did. Sometimes there's just too much to overcome.
Do you know of anywhere that's hiring?
Don't you have a job already?
Well I tried to keep my job but...
Oh no, did you get fired?  What happened?
Well, I was technically laid off.  I wanted to keep my job and tried but they closed the store.
Oh man, that sucks.  I'll ask around if there are any jobs anywhere else.
I tried really hard to keep the job I had
What happened to it? You just started working there.
The store was closing so there was nothing I could do.
That sucks, but I think you will get back on your feet quick.
Thanks, I'm sure I will because I try to be a team player at work
That is true, plus your personality is really outgoing.
I was walking with Jan the other day and she did something that bothered me.
What did she do?
She put her hands on my hips!
Do you think she did it on purpose?
I'm not sure, but I hope it was an accident.
I'm sure it was. Jan would never do anything like that on purpose.
You know I've been friends with Jan since forever, right?
You two go back to elementary school.
Well, yesterday Jan touched my hips.
Oh my god! Jan made a move on you?
No, I think it was by accident.
I can't let the teacher smoke.
Why?
Because I care too much about his health.
That's nice of you.
I can't believe my teacher smokes.
Amazing that he's a health teacher and smokes!
He coughs a lot. When he left the room, I took his pack of cigarettes from the desk.
You shouldn't have done that, they belong to him. You can get in trouble.
Oh well...I helped him a little. He couldn't smoke all day.
Yeah, but I guarantee that's the first thing he grabbed when he got home.
I got what I went in for, but I will never shop in that store again.
I've never seen you so angry. What happened?
I had the worst clerk ever. Customer service sucks in there.
I have heard that from other people too. Maybe you should let management know.
I'm too mad to call management. When they start losing money they will figure it out.
Yeah. The bottom line always makes businesses reassess things.
I went to buy a dress.
So far so good, what happened?
I was ignored by the sales help and when I tried on a dress the saleslady said I looked bad in it.
They certainly weren't looking to win any friends at that store.
You can believe I will never return there.
Another good customer lost to bad service.
I just had the worst experience at the store.
What happened?
When I asked a cashier where something was, she told me to buzz off.
Why would she say such a thing?
I have no idea, but I will never go back there.
Remy tried something new on my scar.
It wasn't anything permanent, was it?
No, she applied some makeup to conceal it.
Was it still visible?
Much less so, but I don't know how regularly I will go through the routine of applying makeup to conceal it.
That does seem like a daily chore, you might skip some days.
I had a fun time in the Bahamas.
Who did you go with?
I went there with my family for Christmas.
That sounds like a lot of fun. But wasn't it weird to spend the holidays somewhere hot?
It wasn't so bad since it was a one time thing.
I'm glad you'll be around for the holidays next year.
I had an awesome time with my family on our Christmas vacation in the Bahamas.
Sounds like the perfect place to have a good vacation.
It definitely was. The weather was beautiful, and we had so much fun.
Did you go to any good restaurants?
We did! Lots of great restaurants, especially seafood.
I'm so jealous. I wish I had gone on a vacation like that!
Animals are the best.
They sure are.
I was walking my dog and gave him a treat just because I love him.
That's nice of you man.
My dog started begging for food during a walk.
How is that dog still so skinny?
I don't know. I fed the dog a treat so that it would stop pestering the stranger with a burger.
Did the other person offer the dog some of the burger?
He was more surprised than reactive.
Yeah, I've never seen a dog do that while accompanied.
I just gave the dog a small treat.
Is it okay to give it that while we're walking?
I guess it's better than the insects he's been eating along the way.
I don't think that treat is going to stop him from eating bugs.
I thought I'd give it a try.
Maybe we should give it bugs for treats.
My dog wagged her tail on our walk.  I knew that meant she wanted a treat, so I threw her a bone.
Marie is a sweet girl.  How old is she now?
She just turned one.
I remember when you brought her home she was a new-born.
She's grown so much.  She's thirty-five pounds now.
She's going to be a big dog.
There were a lot of people who were walking their dog.
Right, I'm glad you gave him something so he can focus on other things.
Exactly, there is a lot to do these days with our dogs
That is very true, I wish they didn't get so easily distracted by food though.
That's part of the stress of owning one I guess.
They most definitely are stressful at times.
The police finally found my stolen bike.
Have they caught the thief?
The bike was found with Sasha. She is the first suspect.
Do you think she could break in to your house?
She didn't have to. The bike was on the yard outside.
Please help me! I can't find my bike!
Do you think that someone stole it?
I have no clue, but it is gone!
What colour is it?
It is bright red with stripes!
The police said that Sasha was caught riding exactly that! We've found the culprit..
My bike was taken out of my yard.
You better call the police and report it.
I already did, they found Sasha from down the street on it.
Are they going to charge her for stealing the bike?
So we were pinned down.  My corporal had just got hit by an RPG and it looked like it was over for my squad.
Oh god!  What did you guys do then?
Well, I had my general call in an airstrike, and in about four minutes, an A-ten Warthog showed up and saved us for good.
Wow!  Warthogs are awesome.
Yep. The saying is, if you hear a Warthog, then you're already dead.
Death to all enemies of Freedom!
I have been practicing dart for months. I'm finally getting good and I want to beat my brother.
I'm terrible at darts. I don't even come close to the bullseye.
I started out that way. I almost hit a person with a dart, in the beginning.
Thank God you didn't hit anymore. That's what I was always remember feeling...that I was going to hurt someone.
I understand. I challenged my brother to a game but he hasn't accepted yet. I can't wait to beat him.
I just had the worst day! I lost my car keys!
Oh no! Did you find them?
I didn't and I don't know what I am going to do. I looked everywhere for them!
Does anyone have a spare set?
No! I am going to have to pay for new keys from the dealer and I don't have the money for that!
I'm really sorry. I can help you look if you like.
I just can't find my keys!
Did you look for them?
Of course!  I've looked everywhere.
Where do you think you left them?
If I knew that, they wouldn't be lost!
Excuse me for trying to help.
Do you know my friend Jordan?  He's a really good guy.
Yes, I know Jordan.  What makes him such a good guy to you?
Well, I was going through a really bad time and I was on drugs and about to drop out of school.  And Jordan sat me down and talked with me a lot and he really helped me see things through a different perspective.
That's great!  So how did things work out for you in the end?
Jordan had been through the same types of things, and he related his experiences to me and helped me see that I could change my situation, turn things around and come out on top.  I graduated at the top of my class and have never touched drugs again.
Jordan should consider becoming a youth counsellor, it seems like he would make a very good one.
I need to just get it together! Things always work out in the long run.
Have you tried speaking to Jordan? He's really good at that sort of stuff
Yeah I have. He spoke a lot about the future rather than focusing on now, which is what I need.
You need to stop having a narrow minded view dude. Sometimes it's a step by step process.
I'll try, but can't promise anything.
Just give me a call if you need me and take care.
I saw an actual ghost this summer vacation.
I can't believe it. Was it a haunted house?
No, I was in the country at a lake and there was a ghost standing in the water.
Did anyone else see it?
No one but me. My father said it was the fog but I really think it was a ghost.
That is spooky!
I swear I saw a ghost when we went on vacation
Really? That's scary. where did you see it?
I saw it in the water by the a boat dock at the lake
Are you sure it wasn't a fish?
Very sure. It looked like the shape of a person but it disappeared after a few seconds
That's scary. Didn't know lakes could be haunted
That's was so freaky, I thought I saw something moving in the water.  It was dark, I was out at the lake for a midnight swim.
What was it?
I think it's a ghost.  It was just on the surface it seems like.
You don't think it was some sea creature.
The water was lit by moonlight but I couldn't tell that clearly.  I got spooked out and got out of water, grab my clothes and ran.  I don't even remember putting my t-shirt back on.
That's funny.
I am so stressed out by my bills.
I thought you had a good paying job?
I do, but about a year ago I got myself a credit card.
Oh, so you got yourself in credit card debt?
Yeah, it was just so easy to go shopping online with it that I wasn't careful at all.
Best advice is to cut it up, return what you can and no more shopping till the debt is paid.
My credit card arrived in the mail and I went on a shopping spree.
You'll regret it when you get the bill in the mail.
I was buying up everything in my shopping carts.
You know you have to actually pay for them.
You mean with real money?
I am scared for you.
I got my first credit card last week!
That's exciting, but you've got to be careful with those things!
Yeah, I think I went a little overboard on Amazon.
That's sure easy to do!
Yeah, it's so easy just to point and click! I got some cool stuff, but I'm going to hate to see the bill!
That's the downside to credit cards, they make it too easy to pile up debt!
So you know how I got a credit card? Well... I got too excited and spent way too much money online.
Oh no! Like how much is too much?
I maxed my credit limit... And I just got my pay check and don't know how I'm going to have enough to pay it all off!
What is your interest rate? It might not be too bad if you can pay it off soon
It's high but that's the thing, my pay checks usually barely cover my bills and I don't have much leftover. How will I ever pay it off?
You could sell stuff online to try and get some extra cash? And throw that card away so you don't do this to yourself again!
Jenny wanted me to be teammate. She said she's looking for a fast runner, so I was perfect.
Great.  What team did you join?
We are on the same soccer team.
You are such a strong player.
I've been playing soccer since I was six.
I remember your mom used to take you to practice.
So, after doing endless trials, I have finally found the perfect team.
Oh cool! Who is it?
It's Jenny's team, I came first in 100, 200 and 300 metre races. Really had a field day out there.
Check you out! Leave some glory for the others too tomorrow!
The other day I was walking with Quinn and he almost walked out into traffic!
Darn! That sounds scary! What happened?
I grabbed his wrist and twisted it a bit to stop him.
I hope you didn't hurt him.
No. It was just to get his attention to stop him.
That is scary! Good thing you were there!
My mom is driving me crazy with her health kick.
What health kick is she on now?
She does not want me to have any sweets, at all.
Is that because of the wrestling tournament coming up?
She wants me to stay in my current weight class. I was able to convince her to let me get a ice cream.
One ice cream is not going to make you gain 20 pounds!
Man, I honestly forgot what ice cream tasted like. I hadn't had it in so long
Was that the other day when you were at the mall with your mom?
Yeah, I had to literally beg her!
Oh god, at least you got it in the end. What flavours?
Went for something really niche. Pistachio and salted caramel.
Now I want some, great..
I had the best ice cream yesterday.
Where was it from?
It was from Friendly's, and honestly it was so amazing.
What flavour did you get?
I got cookie dough. I literally had to beg my mom for a cone, and she finally said yes.
You are lucky you are allowed to have ice cream, my parents are way too strict with that stuff.
I did something bad today.
Tell me all about it.
So my mum wouldn't want to get me an ice cream, even after begging. I stole money from her purse and bought one anyway.
You really are something else.
I was so worried about everyone that day
what happened that made you worried?
Jordan was not feeling well and slept most of the day
that must have been a crazy party that night
Yeah it was. I stayed with Jordan until he was awake
That was a very good move.
You've got to check on your friends.
I agree.
Yeah, I wanted to make sure everyone was doing alright as I followed in Jordan's wake.
Wait, what do you mean followed in Jordan's wake?
That monkey was misbehaving all day long!
Oh no, what did you do?
I spanked him, I didn't know what else to do but he needed to stop
How did he react to the spanking?
He ran off and sulked, at least he stopped throwing things around
Might have to call the police on you next time!
I am really worried about this kid Riley, who has been missing for ten days.
Wow, that's a long time to be missing.
I know, we are still canvassing the neighbourhood but I think he may be somewhere else.
Do you need help with any search parties or anything?
His friends are organizing one for this weekend so I can text you the details.
I will be happy to help, but hopefully you can find him before then!
Hey, I just had a nice neighbourly moment.
Cool, it's always good to help out our neighbours! What happened?
Long story short, my neighbours' son, Jordan, needed to cross the street to get his ball.
But he can't do that alone! He's just five!
Yeah, so I held his hand and crossed with him. We grabbed the ball and crossed back over. He was so happy and his mom came out and thanked me!
Nice. Paying it forward with good deeds!
I couldn't believe it when I saw Jordan at the intersection, trying to cross the street by himself.
Jordan's just a little kid, isn't he?
Yes!  He's only ten and that's a really busy intersection.
Did you tell his parents?
I got him across the street and waited with him while I called them.  They didn't know he was out of the house.
I'm sure they were glad that you found him.
Jordan is so little, he needed my help crossing the street.
How cute. Where were you taking him?
To McDonalds for lunch.
I bet he enjoyed that. Did you let him go in the playground?
Yes. He had fun in there for about an hour or so.
Next time, I'll come with you and bring my little sister. I think it would be fun for both kids,
Man, I feel bad for Kendall.
Kendall in planning?
Yeah, she made a really big mistake during the project and the company had to pay for it.
That's awful, is she going to be fired?
No, but I don't think they will give her many opportunities like this again.
That sucks.
I hate when your friends at work mess up, makes it very awkward for the whole office.
So what happened with Kendall in the end?
Well, she basically messed up a whole workflow which meant the project was useless.
Oh damn, did you fire her?
I couldn't, I felt too bad for her so I gave her a second shot and a stern warning.
Good, I hope she gets on alright.
My friends are throwing a party tonight which I am looking forward to. I've been feeling lonely today.
Why are you lonely?
Well, Sam flew to the East Coast for school yesterday so it's just been me. I think I miss her.
How much longer before she graduates?
This is her last semester before she moves back home for work. She already landed a job out here. She wants to be my roommate when she's back.
You two are so close.
I can't believe how cheap that antique was!
I know! Those people did not know what they were selling.
I made almost $400 profit selling it on eBay
That is awesome!
It makes me want to do garage selling more
Right? See what other treasures are out there
I sold an antique on eBay today.
Really? Where did you get the antique?
I found the priceless antique at an estate sale last weekend.
Wow. Nice find. Is it worth much?
It's worth quite a bit.
Glad you made some money.
I needed help financially, and I took this matter into my own hands.
That doesn't sound good. What did you do?
See Casey's purse on her chair over there? She's wasn't back from the bathroom for a couple minutes, so I went in there and took out a few twenties. She's rich and won't notice!
That doesn't sound smart, Kai....
I don't care. I need the money. I'll get her back later! She's rich and she can deal with it.
Still...I don't endorse that kind of behaviour, Kai...
Honestly one of the best nights of my life!
Run me through it.
The music was popping off, the drinks were flowing and I just had to put my arm around Hannah's neck while watching the main act.
Ah man, you're making me jealous. I've been single for a while now.
I know someone that would get along with you, I'll introduce you at some point.
I had a sleepover at Mandy's house last night.
Were they able to wake you up this morning, sleepyhead?
Not fair! I actually woke up before everybody else so I made coffee for all.
That's a rare occasion for you!
I know, I'm usually the last one to wake in the mornings.
Yeah, I can't remember you ever making the coffee before.
I was supposed to wear formal clothes for an event, but I couldn't find them. So I just wore shorts instead.
Did anyone say anything to you about it?
No one said anything, but I got a lot of weird looks.
Do you think people were mad?
I'm not sure they were super mad, but I think they weren't happy either.
I probably would have gone out and bought more formal clothes instead.
What do you think of my outfit?
Why are you wearing shorts instead of wearing your suit?
I was looking for formal attire, but I couldn't find anything that fit and anything that I was comfortable in. I ended up just wearing my own shorts instead.
It's definitely an eclectic outfit.
Bailey couldn't find the medical solution yesterday and had to phone me about it.
Did you help Bailey out?
I told her where to look in the medical cabinet and she eventually found my solution in there.
I'm impressed you were able to guide her to the solution over the phone.
I'm out of the office a lot, so I'm often getting calls from co-workers who need my help even though I'm away.
Man I love Bailey, but he can be so irresponsible and dopey.
Oh God, what's he done now?
He forgot to pickup his prescription and didn't realise until an hour after searching in the cabinet.
That's just classic Bailey really.
Yeah, so in the end I had to give him some of my solution
Thank God he's got you in his life.
Bailey had a really bad headache.
Did she take some medicine?
She didn't want to find the medical solution for her headache in the medicine cabinet.
Are there any other options for her?
She called me and asked me for a solution that is not in the medicine cabinet. I gave her the perfect solution. Her headache has healed.
She should feel better now.
It has been such a hard road.
But you finally found help.
It has taken a long time to find someone who could help with this addiction.
As long as you stick with the program.
I definitely will, I have had an addiction for way to long.
It's good you are seeking help.
Wow, for the first time in a while I have felt like the help I got has actually worked.
That's wonderful to hear! I assume you are going to keep going back?
Yes, I am going to continue to see this doctor. She is absolutely wonderful.
That's so great, can you tell me anything about your session today?
Yes we did a 30 minute relaxation session before my meditation and therapy. I left feeling freed from my addiction.
Wow, I am so happy for you, please keep me updated on your progress.
I am a counselling God!
What did you do?
Depression hasn't a chance when I'm around!
Are you going to tell me what you did?..
My patient came to me with feelings of loneliness and despair, but after just five minutes with me he was transformed! No doubt a complete rebirthing in mindset!  This once weary and desperate person raced out of my office faster than a speeding bullet!  No doubt with a new lease on life!
Yeah, I am still paying for your top quality counselling. Thanks .
This skate park is so cool, I don't know why I never came before.
What kind of tricks do you want to try?
I can't do any tricks because I forgot to bring my board
I thought you  borrowed Lee's?
Ok, you've caught me out. I did and couldn't even do an ollie.
Lee is very generous and always willing to help, ask him for tips next time.
Lee is such a chill guy, he let me borrow his board, we had a good laugh and I even landed my first ollie!
Damn, that's some good progress for day one.
I fell about ten times in a row, but the pain was worth the reward.
Did Lee do his usual crazy stuff?
Yeah, the guy is insane! He was grinding rails, landing kickflips and everyone at the park was watching him.
I'll need to come see this next time.
I can't believe I forgot my board on the first time I go to the skatepark.
Yeah, that's not like you at all. You always have your board with you.
Fortunately Lee was nice enough to loan me his.
That was really considerate of him.
I would have been so disappointed not to try out that skatepark. It was awesome.
That's great! Lee saved the day!
Man, I need to get running.
But its raining outside.
It doesn't matter rain, snow or sleet I've got to get my run in.
Man you are determined on running, that is awesome. I wish I could be more like you.
You can just start out slowly.
That was intense!
You look absolutely drenched, what the hell happened to you?
I looked outside, saw that it was snowy and windy and went for a run anyway.
You really don't care about the condition do you?
No, I will run even if the world is falling apart!
You're crazy.
Wait for me. I will just run for 30 minutes.
Run? on a kind of weather like this?
Yes. Whether it's windy, rainy, sleet or snowy. I will still run.
You really are athletic.
In order for me to have my exercise.
Okay. Good luck.
If I didn't run at least 30 minutes every day I wouldn't know what to do.
You didn't run in that snow yesterday did you?
Of course, I can't depend on the weather to cooperate around here.
I knew you ran in the wind and rain but I didn't know you went out in snowstorms too.
A little sleet or snow isn't going to stop me.
I wish I had your motivation!
I feel like a brand new person.
That's great! What brought about this feeling?
Well now that my kids are grown I can start doing things that I want to do.
What hobbies have you picked up?
Well I've started to travel a lot and really enjoy it. I'm going hiking in Switzerland next month.
Wow that's fantastic! You've already probably been to more places than I have.
I spent my whole life looking after my children.  Now that they are all grown up, I can pursue my own interest.
Live your life.
I am making up for lost time.  I have so much I want to do.
So excited for you, you can do anything you want.
It's so liberating not to be tied down by kids.
You have quite a few of them too.
The line at the restaurant was so long. I even saw Sasha at the end.
She was there too?
Yeah I felt so bad I got food for and brought it to her.
That was nice of you. Hope she paid you for it.
You always think about money.
Man, the service in there is so slow. There was literally a queue outside the shop.
Did you go with Sasha?
Yeah, I ended up just buying food for the both of us.
She hates missing lunch before her math class.
I know, and I got all her favourites.
You're a good friend Jordan, but don't let her take advantage.
That new fast food joint in town is really in demand at the moment.
I haven't been yet, was it any good?
Yeah Sasha came along but she was shopping beforehand so I just got her food too to save her from queuing again.
I thought Sasha was vegan?
I can not believe that I came in last place.
At least you finished the race.
Yes, but I did not qualify.
So you need to be in the top ten?
Yes, in order to move on to the statewide finals.
Give it a try next year.
I am going to wear my hat tonight.
Is it the same hat your normally wear?
Yes, I wear it everyday! I love my hat.
That hat does look good on you!
Do you like hats?
Sometimes, why?
I love this hat I am wearing!
I can tell.  You wear it a lot.
I know.  I'm silly.
Well, you do you I guess.
I can find a solution to your water issues.
I hope you do. We need water flow to the town from the river.
I can solve your riddle and help you once I see the river.
There is the fork in the river.
You need a dam placed right in this spot to divert the river to the town.
You are a life saver. No more carrying water all the way from the river!
I was actually able to solve that riddle easily.
How did you do it?
I'm good at finding new solutions to things.
And you used that skill to solve a riddle?
Yeah. I solved it in a novel way.
I'm not even good at doing crosswords.
The folks were really interested to hear about Lee.
What'd you tell them?
I just told them all about him, and what his life has been like.
Got it, but you didn't include anything private in there, did you?
Of course not! I just told them about his background and some of the general cool life experiences that  he's had.
Ah, got it. He would be mad if you revealed any of that other stuff!
So, you want to know more about Lee?
You're our friend and he's your friend, but we know nothing about him.
Lee lives in Florida, I met him years ago on a family vacation.  He is a surfer.
Really, did you surf with him?
No, too good for me.  He has a great sense of humour, but most interestingly, right now he is traveling around the world, surfing at all the best spots.
That's incredible, he's doing the endless summer.
Lee is a really wonderful person and has a lot to offer the world, but I think sometimes people write him off because of his appearance.
Yeah. I definitely can see that. He isn't very outgoing and he comes off a bit standoffish.
I know, but once you learn about his past you can see why he isn't always so friendly. He has good intentions though.
I can tell that now after hearing you explain his past. I feel a bit bad I had judged him before.
I understand. It is easy to assume things about others.
Thanks for being so kind and understanding about my misjudgements.
I love playing with Ash when he gets home.
I'm surprised you do that.
What would you say that?
You seem to be busy all the time.
Regardless of how tired I am when I get home from work, I love making time to play with Ash.
You're a good father.
Ash is so much fun to play with, sometimes it's gaming, other times it's football and occasionally we have a pillow fight!
Honestly don't know where you get the energy from.
I'll usually get a coffee or two and I'm ready to go!
Can I join you guys next time?
I love being a parent.
What do you love about it?
Every day I get to play with Ash. It brightens my day.
I bet. Aren't you tired after work?
Usually, but we still make sure to do it.
I completely understand, you have to be there for your kids!
Ash is my best friend.
Have long have you been friends?
We were classmates on first grade.
You go a long way.
We play every day when we get home from work
I envy your friendship.
I noticed that Quinn hadn't really made any friends yet.
You're right, I saw him all night struggling to spark a conversation with anyone.
And so I told him that he tends to talk a lot about himself a lot, rather than asking about them. People love to talk about themselves.
Hey man, give him a break though. Takes a while to become a good listener.
We all have to start somewhere..
I suppose you're right.
I felt pretty bad for Quinn the other night, so I gave him some of my advice.
I know that Quinn is a massive introvert, but surely you'd think he could make at least a couple of friends!
Well, I just told him to loosen up and act chilled, people like it when you're yourself.
I know right, I can always tell when someone is putting up a front.
Exactly my point, thank you.
Hey friend, what's up?
Hey Cameron, nothing much going as usual.
Okay, I noticed that Quinn is having trouble making friends with others.
Yes, I noticed that too
So I decided to give Quinn couple words of advice.
Good, you did great
Man, why can't people just grow up!
What's happened now?
They made a song, sort of, with my name so that they can mock me.
I would probably tell the principal if I were you, that’s serious bullying.
Yeah, I'll write a complaint to her.
Let me know how it goes.
It was awful, I didn't know if I should be angry or sad.
What did they do? Was Lee doing it too?
They were just all making fun of me, and Lee was the worst!
What did he do? Am I going to be mad?
He made a rhyme out of my name, but he used it to make fun of me, not to be nice.
I can't wait to get my hands on that kid!
I frustrated the family last night.
What happened?
Well, I didn't want to go to a party with them, so I was dragging my feet getting ready.  Eventually we arrived very late because of me.
That wasn't nice; why didn't you just stay home?
They were making me go.
Well, you kind of acted like a baby.
I feel so badly about what happened at the party yesterday.
I know, I felt kind of embarrassed for you to be honest.
I did not mean to make the family late, it just took a long time to do my makeup.
Yeah but Casey honestly, you really should have done that earlier.
I know, and that is why I feel terrible about it.
Also no one would have cared anyways what you look like.
I just can't believe that Scott would do something like that.
Do you know how guys are when they get around their friends.
They become immature little boys.
It's so aggravating that we have to deal with this.
This is my last warning to Scott, next step is divorce.
You mean business Jan.
I was comforting Addison this morning.
Why were you comforting Addison?
Addison's parent died last night. I put my hand on her shoulder so she knows I'm there for her.
Please give her my sympathies.
I certainly wouldn’t want to be is Addison's shoes right now.
I heard you met up with her yesterday, how did that go?
Well, to be frank, not amazing. She's still mourning the death of her mother and so I put my hand around her shoulder and she had a big cry. I just hope she feels a little better now.
I'll make sure to have a word with her as well tomorrow.
Addison lost one of his parents.
I am so sorry about that. Have you talked to them?
I have. Addison is obviously broken .
He needs a shoulder to cry on.
I have tried to comfort him by putting a hand on his shoulder.
You are doing great. I hope he will be able to conquer this tribulation.
So I ended up asking her out to the movies, but she thought I was hitting on her.
You should have asked me! I enjoy going to the movies and I haven't been in a while.
I just hate going alone, I feel awkward.
You ignoring what I just said?
Yeah ok ok! Maybe next time I'll see if I can organise something for us
That sounds good.
I took care of Emmy while she was sick, and now I am sick.
Really what is wrong with you.  You don't look sick.
I have a high fever and don't feel good at all.
Do you need anything while I am here?
No, I'll be alright.  But thanks for asking.
I have fever, no one to take care of me!
I should have come around but I am so far away!
Oh! I can see nobody here and I have taken care of a friend while they were sick.
Can you call someone else?
No one is available for now.
That's bad!
I'm really nervous, I'm sick now and I think it's because of my friend.
Why? Is something going around?
I was taking care of my friend who has the flu, I brought them to the doctor and then brought them soup.
Well, that was really nice of you.
But now I have a fever, so I'm worried I have the flu too.
Oh no... Maybe they're feeling better and can take care of you!
That is a crazy looking sign and it has so many expectations from us.  These new adventures drive me crazy
I can't read what the sign says at all.  I am not from around places like this and I think that I would be so lost without you
Yeah overall the sign itself is pretty good.  I think I can pan out what it says so we are able to make it through the excursion
Thanks for being able to translate it
Yeah, It's all good. If anything like this comes up again I'll be sure to make everyone aware.
Thanks so much!
I think I'm doing well at my new job.
Do the guests pay attention on the tour?
Yeah, I read the signs out loud so they can understand things better.
Do you get a lot of compliments at the end?
I do, they're very appreciative.
You're a very attentive tour guide.
I wanted to read this sign to everyone.
Thanks now they understand.
As well on the excursion?
That's correct.
What's everyone excited about most?
Likely the beach!
I tried out the motorcycle for awhile.
Did you like it?
I did, I was a little scared of the speed though.
Just because it goes that fast doesn't mean it should go that fast.
I didn't go fast, I just wanted to test it out and see how it was.
Hope you enjoyed it!
I said to him no, not right now and he just wouldn’t listen.
What was your excuse?
I said that I was busy reading.
I mean, they must have done something to convince you?
He said he'd pay for entry and drinks into this new nightclub.
Wow, that’s bargaining at it's finest.
Some people are just so persistent, oh my god!
Please don’t tell me Sarah was bothering you again.
She was.
What did she want now?
She was insisting I'd call her all day, I said no about ten times until I gave in and spoke to her.
My god she can be annoying.
So I was pretty reluctant to do it at first but in the end I was persuaded.
Tell me more.
Well, mum wanted me to clean the house but I was shattered from working all day.
I heard you say no about seven times! How did she convince you?
She said she would get me a take out dinner, I couldn't resist.
I don’t blame you.
I can't believe what happened to the tests.
The tests from school?
Yeah, I was grading them in my house and my coffee spilled all over them.
What will you tell the kids?
Maybe my dog ate them.
That's the first time a teacher has used that excuse!
I just spilled coffee all over my exam papers.
Were they your exams?
No, I was grading the class papers and knocked the coffee over.
Oh no. What are you going to do if they're stained?
I am going to try to photo copy them so they're black and white, but I might have to tell the class what I did.
At least the kids will be able to laugh when they're getting their grades.
I felt so bad.  I poured myself a full cup of coffee before grading papers at home in my kitchen, I spilled coffee all over the papers. They are a complete mess.
As long as the students get their grades, I don't think they care that much.
I hope not.
As a positive, they are used to spilled coffee on their work.
They'll forgive me, I hope.
I wouldn't sweat it.
Its was so simple to do. I'm shocked no one else saw it.
Good for you saving all that money. It was pure genius.
Our nation needs to reduce its debt and I looked at it from all angles.
What did you find by the way?
A very simple accounting move to help that debt problem by a reduction of interest.
The government should give you a bonus or something for saving the all that money.
I can't believe I got a letter from President Obama. He said I helped save the country.
Yeah, dream on, Taylor. Obama's going to thank you?
I'm not kidding, I sent him a letter with a suggestion about a new accounting thing I came up with.
Oh my god, you are serious. Can I see the letter?
Sure, but be very careful. I want to frame it and put it on the wall.
That is awesome. Now, in layman's terms, explain to me what new thing you came up with.
I'm glad I was able to save the nation's debt problem.
How did you do that?
I used a genius accounting move that had not been seen before.
Is the government going to give you a reward for that?
I hope so. They just saved a lot of money.
Hopefully it's a cash prize or something.
I found the little guy at the shelter. He was scared to death.
I'm so glad you rescued him. What kind is he?
He's a mix of golden retriever and Pyrenees.
He's going to be huge, but a sweetie.
Yeah. He's already eating two cans of food a day.
I'll give you a case of food for Christmas.
I finally found the perfect dog that I've wanted for a long time.
Where did you get the dog?
I saw an advertisement in the newspaper. The owner's dog had puppies and couldn't take care of all the puppies.
You got lucky! I want a German Sheppard.
I finally found the perfect dog for me.
Great to hear. What breed is the dog?
It's a husky. I've been wanting one for a while now.
How old is the husky?
She is three years old.
Happy to hear you found the right dog.
I've been taking odd jobs to pay for college.
What kinds of jobs?
Well, today I delivered packages to people all over the city.
How did that come about?
A realtor wanted to give gifts to his best clients.
I suppose you were a lot cheaper than a delivery company.
I have just been picking up some odd jobs at night.
What kind have you been doing?
Yesterday I had to deliver packages to people in the city.
Did you carry your gun on you, you know it's scary there?
Yeah I did.
I don't like to go in this area of town, it seems dangerous
Someone was just killed last week in a robbery gone wrong, I read
Well that doesn't help my anxiety at all Robert.
At least you'll be in a car when delivering the packages.
Well, sometimes it's best to keep some things to yourself.
Apologies.
I think I'm in a lot of trouble now.
Have you been gambling?
Yeah, I even put a mortgage on my house for funds.
And things didn't go well with the gambling?
I lost everything, I have nothing now.
You don't even have a place to live?
I mortgaged my house.
What did you do with the money?
I gambled with it and lost every penny.
I am so sorry to hear that.
Oh no I am in big trouble!
What's wrong, what's going on?
I mortgaged my house, got a big amount of money and lost it all.
How come?
I went gambling and I lost everything, I lost every penny.
Oh man, that's wrong. I hope you find a solution soon.
I am feeling horrible about what I did
I heard you lost some money. How did it happen?
I lost it by gambling it away. I lost every penny
where did the money come from?
I had mortgaged my house. I can't believe I did that
Wow I am sorry to hear it. You'll get back on your feet.
I think Addison was really happy with my military service.
For you to get that award for your 20 years in there, I'd say so too. Congrats, Tracy!
Thanks, I will miss being in there but it's time to move on.
What all did Addison do for you?
Well, I got the award, plus I got to go to a dinner in my honour and finally, I met the Governor.
Governor Whitmer? Wow that had to be exciting!
I am so glad Quinn is helping me out.
How is the diet going?
It's good, Quinn is keeping track of my food intake.
Why can't you do it?
I would probably cheat, knowing me!
I guess it's best to get Quinn to do it!
I will be presenting the case to trial tomorrow.
It is so unlike you to take this long.
I had to carry out a thorough investigations.
This case must be quite important to you.
It could earn me a promotion.
Then you better bring your A game to the trial.
I am fully prepared to bring this case to trial now.
You have been investigating it for a long time, what made you do it?
I've got a lot of good evidence and information that's going to help me with the case.
Do you think you're going to win?
It's ultimately up to the jury but I think I got a great shot.
You're a great lawyer, so I believe you will win. Just make sure you don't get into any trouble.
I am bringing this case to trail.
Why is that?
I think it is time. There is a lot of incriminating evidence and I think that people are guilty
They most certainly are
Yeah, they are going to be taken to court now
Good for you for serving some justice
I can't believe it. I just got word that my show is being renewed for 2 more seasons!
Congratulations! I'm so happy for you. Are you going to have to move then?
Well, unfortunately, I probably will move. It's too hard trying to live here and work there.
Yeah, I understand. You do a lot of commuting so it'll free up a lot of your time.
Yes, and maybe you should move there with me. You could live with me and save some money.
That's not a bad idea. I'll have to think about that...after you're settled in.
So that pilot I was featured on got picked up for at least one season.
That is wonderful! When did you find out?
This morning. They did a focus group and the people said I was really believable as the up and coming model. It played really well to the audience.
Aubrey, how cool! Do you know when it will air?
Not yet. We only shot the first three episodes so we need to finish filming the rest of the season. I am really excited about the character's wardrobe.
I can imagine. Maybe you will get to keep some of the clothes!
It was so fun playing an aspiring model, and everyone was so nice.
Do you think you'll be asked back for more episodes?
I'm not sure, I hope so. It's a new show so you never know.
I saw the ratings were really good, though!
Really? Well, if it's a hit, maybe there will be more work for me.
I bet, you did a great job on it. It was a perfect role for you!
I finally found my car that was stolen.
Where did you find it?
It was on the side of the road, really close to my home.
Did they take anything out of the car?
Yeah, I had money in the glove compartment and a charger that was stolen.
That sucks man, but I am glad that you got it back.
I was starting to think I had parked it somewhere and forgotten about it.
No kidding, you were looking for it all weekend.
The police were pretty sure it was stolen, though. There's been a lot of stolen cars in the area.
I'm surprised you were able to find it.
I know! It was just sitting there on the side of the road. What a relief.
You're lucky it was all intact. They usually get those taken apart quickly.
Well the search is over, I found my car.
Wait, what happened to it?
It gotten stolen some time on Friday, I went to go move it and it was gone.
Oh geez, did you have an alarm or tracker on it?
Its an old beat up hand me down car, no tracker. I borrowed my parents' car and drove around all weekend and just found it on the side of the road all vandalized.
That's terrible.  At least you can fill out a police report and recover something from insurance for it.
I wrote a new article for the newspaper.
What was the article about?
I gave the readers a thorough analysis of Riley's perspective.
What did you think of Riley's perspective?
I thought it was amazing.
I analysed Riley's perspective in an article that was just published.
Riley has such a unique perspective. She has so much to say.
Her work is an interesting read, it was well written and thought out.
Riley is a deep thinker. Deeper than me for sure.
She gives the reader much to think about.
The best writers do that.
It was a fishing trip planned through the church and turned out great.
How did you all get to the boat?
We took the church bus. We loaded all our stuff on and lots of food and made a day of it.
So you are friends with the people from your church?
Yes, and while fishing we really bonded.
If you all plan another fishing trip can I come?
I went fishing with the people from my church the other day.
Did you guys catch anything?
We did, but it was more like a community event. All the regular churchgoers came.
That's a more interesting way to have a gathering.
Yes, it was a better idea than the usual dances and stuff.
And you brought home food too!
So my weekend was nice and relaxing compared to the rest of the week!
That's good! What did you end up doing?
I went on a fishing trip with some churchmates after we got out of church.
Sweet, did you catch anything?
Nope! I was the only one who didn't catch a thing. But it was a lot of fun and a good bonding experience.
Yeah, most of the people are church are really nice. I should do more stuff with them too!
Man, the people from the church are really great and welcoming.
You guys are doing something different every weekend, I'm so jealous!
I was so happy when reverend Taylor announced the Sunday church fishing trip I could barely sleep.
So, next time you go I'm expecting you to be a pro.
I'm not promising anything, but I did catch a ten kilo carp!
Damn, time for dinner I guess.
Hi, I would like to apply for a job.
Great, we are actually hiring for a dishwasher position right now. It is yours if you want it.
That would be great! When do I start?
Tomorrow at noon!
Excellent, I will be here. What is the pay?
The pay will be $7.50 per hour.
Just to get a few dollars and I''m working so hard .
I know it’s tough right now but things are gonna get better for you.
I hope so, as I don’t think I can take this anymore.
Don’t give up, you’re going to get there and you’ll be smiling down from the top.
I just have to finish school and then see where we go.
The only place you’ll be going is to the top.
I'm broke and desperate for money
I thought you had a dishwashing job
I do, but it pays dismal wages, barely enough to eat
That's terrible. How do you pay rent?
I can't afford rent.
You can always crash at my place if you need somewhere safe to sleep.
I am so nervous!! What if the needle snaps or breaks?
I would not worry about.
No way, I am not going to get a flu shot.
As long as there're no air bubbles in the needle you'll be fine
Air bubbles? What do you mean air bubbles?
Just go!
I had to wait a long time to get my flu shot.  It was nerve wracking.  I hate needles.
I am afraid of needles too.  Did you get your shot?
After almost an hour of waiting, I finally got my shot.  I had to turn away when the nurse poked my skin with the needle.
It's over now.
Until I get vaccinated for something else next week.
Are these vaccines you need to start your job?
You know I am an action-aholic.
What in the world is that?
I put Kendall's plan into action.
Do you have any news to share?
I am excited to report that I am bringing Kendall her share of the profits.
She is going to be excited, as well.
Kendall's idea really paid off and we made a profit on the sale items.
Good for you guys. Are you able to keep it or reinvest?
I'm giving us both a share of the profits and we're going to keep selling the same way.
That must be a good business model she came up with.
It was! I plan to continue it.
I hope you keep doing well, too!
I am going to take the high road this time and forgive Peter and John for making fun of my sister.
Really? That is quite big of you, Jesse. Especially since Peter and John are twice your size.
It is not that. I'm sure I could hold my own if I challenged them to fight. I just think it is a better example for the young boys here to see a man not resort to violence.
Right. And it has nothing to do with Peter being a judo master and John carrying a switch blade in his boot.
Nothing at all, friend. I just choose to be the bigger man.
You can lie to yourself, Jesse, but you can't lie to me.
I really need to learn how to throw a ball better.
I can teach you if you like.
That would be great. How do I get started?
Well the first thing is to always step into your throw.
So you mean I should use my legs to get more power?
Yes, exactly. A strong throw is impossible without using your lower body.
Hey guys, this looks like fun, can I play too?
Sure you can be on my team, throw me that red ball
Here you go, oops sorry
Here try again
Ok, oops, okay I think I am a better kicker than a thrower haha
I hope you so! We need to win this game!
I can finally get my new car!
Wow! You have enough money to buy it?
I had a car wash fundraiser to raise the money.
That's a smart idea!
I'm so excited! I can't wait to go down to the dealership.
I'm so happy for you!
I am so excited! Many of my friends showed up to help wash cars and raise money for me! Thanks for coming.
You're welcome. Anything we can do to get you out of that old junk car.
I know. I am surprised the car still runs. It's 30 years old. It is very unreliable.
You do need a new car but make sure to take people with you when you shop. You need an affordable car, not an expensive car.
I will take you and others with me. I am nervous when dealing with car salesmen. All they want is a higher sale with commission.
That's true. We will help you stick to your price range and not let them talk you up.
I really need a new car. Mine is so old and barely runs anymore.
We should have a car wash to raise money!
That's a great idea! It will be just like highschool!
Yeah! It will be fun.
We should send out a message to some friends and see if they'll help.
Yeah! I'll start making a list.
Where have you travelled in Europe?
Well, I've been to Italy, France, Spain, and The Netherlands.
Wow, that is fascinating, where would you like to go next?
I'm thinking of going to Poland maybe.
Oh no!  I'm so sorry!  I spilt the pinot noir all over the table.  I'm so clumsy!
It's ok, Jordan.  Let me help you clean it up.
Oh my goodness I'm so clumsy! Watch out that it doesn't get on you.
It's okay, I'll lift the table cloth. Good thing we have a lot of napkins here.
I'm so embarrassed; I hope the waiter be angry.
It's his job, don't worry. We'll get something else. Why are you so clumsy today?
I think I'm nervous about the date later. I keep dropping things.
Then the next glass needs to go in you, not on you and you'll relax a bit.
Hey I saw Aubrey the other night. She got a job after school.
Cool. What is she doing?
Well, she is working at a gas station. She filled up my tank for me.
Did she seem like she was happy with it?
Well, I think she's doing it to save a little money for college.
That's a great idea. She'll definitely have book money plus, she may even be able to come out to the mall with us!
Hey, girl! What are you doing working on your day off?
I need the money for my college tuition! A good education isn’t cheap!
True. Can you fill it up for me?
Sure thing. What are you doing tonight?
Nothing special. Probably Netflix and Chill. Why, you wanna do something?
Sure! I’ll come by around 7:00. See you then!
I think I have problems with forgiveness.
What did you do?
I told my son Kendall to go ahead and fight the war if he can't admit that he's wrong.
You encouraged him? ?
Yeah, all because he kept pushing these regressive ideologies and turned out completely different than what I had expected.
Do you think that will work?
You should have thought about that before you stole money from me 5 years ago!
I'm sorry, please do not send me to war, I paid the money back!
I don't care if you paid the money back, that doesn't make up for the fact that you stole it in the first place! I can't forgive you for that!
Please sir, I meant no harm, my family was hungry! They need me, please don't make me go to war
Then you should have asked for the money! Off you go! No mercy!
You are an evil man!
So you know that gang war I've been telling you about?
What about it?
Well I'm a lieutenant in my gang now so I get to decide who has to fight in the war.
Who are you going to choose?
Well Kendall beat me up in my initiation when I first joined the gang so now I can send him off to war.
You're a vindictive grudge holder.
I really feel responsible for the new guys at work, even though I'm not the boss or even the designated trainer for new hires.
Really?  How does that work out for you?  Do you get extra money?
No, no, I don't get anything out of it, other than the satisfaction of knowing that all our new guys get the training they actually need, and not the HR and Teams crap that doesn't really teach them anything useful.
I bet after you train your people the right way they really appreciate it.
You know, they really do all seem to appreciate the way I go above and beyond to make sure they get the advice and help they need to handle their machinery safely and more productively.
I wish I could work in your department.  I might transfer from Sanitation to your department just so you could train me, as well.
I have to help everyone at work.
That sucks. Are they paying you a lot?
Not really I asked for a raise, but they declined.
You should find a new job.
Hey thanks so much for the ride home yesterday.
Oh no problem at all! Did your mom make it to work on time?
Yeah thanks to you. It's too bad she missed the end of the game though. That was awesome!
It sure was! She would have loved seeing you get that game winning hit.
Well I told her all about it. She was super happy for me.
I saw someone in the stands filming the game. Maybe we can find a video of it.
You sure do like cake don't you Jesse?
I really do, There is a lot of cake that the people like, especially chocolate
yeah that is honestly one of my favorites.  I love your cakes
yeah I know,  I'm glad we got a lot of the things on your to do list done
right. I'm glad everything worked out a lot
yeah me too
Extra extra chocolate please
well, one extra extra chocolate cake coming up
Thanks Jesse you're the best
Do I even have to ask what kind of icing you want
Hmm, let me think, CHOCOLATE!
how did I know that
Why are you resting on my shoulder?
I'm tired and had a long day at work.
Ah.  I see.  You can't use a pillow instead?
No.  I like you more.
Ah.  Well I guess you can sit here for a little bit.
Thank you.
Lee came in, dropped his things on the floor, sat down next to me and put his head on my shoulder.
Wow he must have had a really tough day.
He said everyone at his job is very tense because another company is buying them.
Why should that make things tense?
They don't know who is going to be kept at the company.
Okay, I see where the tension would come from then.
Lee had a busy day at work
Is he still a mechanic? He must be so tired
Yeah he rested on my shoulder and nodded off to sleep
You're supportive when you need to be
I hope his hours get cut
Me too, he needs rest
What's wrong my dear? You look so tired.
I had a long day at work and yes I am tired.
Is there anything I can do for you?
No, just let me lay down and rest on your shoulders.
Okay rest all you want.
It's just the relief that I am off work tomorrow.
Riley I am really going to miss you!
I know I'm going to miss you too!
You are like my best friend are you sure you have to move?
I'm sure, it's for my job I will be able to make a lot more money in Texas.
I know but Texas is three states away I feel like I will never see you again.
Of course you will! I will be home for all of the holidays.
I am really bummed out because I just found out that Riley is moving away.
Will she still be able to visit you?
I don't think so, at least not very often because she will be moving across the country.
That really sucks. You guys can always video chat.
That is true, but it just isn't the same as having the person right there.
I understand and I am really sorry this is happening.
The new horse is a beauty. We had a nice long ride.
Were there any issues?
No, she responded beautifully and didn't have any problems with the hard parts.
It looks like it was raining too?
Yeah. It was. I'm going to hang up my clothes to dry and maybe go for another ride this afternoon.
Sounds like a plan.
My clothes all got wet in the rain.
Man. You got to remember to bring an umbrella.
I know. I had to run home.
Running in the rain just makes it worse.
I took a huge break the other day and went a little crazy.
Sounds like you needed it.
Yeah. I've been working really hard, so I got on my motorcycle in the rain and went nuts. Rode hard, and had to let my clothes dry for a few hours.
Well, as long as you took all the precautions, I think it was a great idea to blow off steam!
Thanks. I'm tired of people judging me negatively for wanting to have a little fun.
Well, I know you take precautions, so I think the benefits are worth it!
Well, let's see. I want a good team so Frank, you're on my side. I want you to really spike the ball if you get it.
No problems, Cameron. I can hit that bad boy to Osh Kosh if you want me to.
Well, I'm not asking you to drive the ball halfway into the ground or take someone's head off, just spike it.
Ok, I got you. I'll behave, honest!
Now, they are forming a good team, and we have one just as good. This volleyball match is going to be a tough one.
Well, you got me 100%. Now let's go win this thing!
I just talked to the team on the beach.
How did that go?
It was a productive meeting, another group was formed.
That sounds like a lot of team work.
It is, it was a good idea to take them to the beach.
I bet that created bonds between them and strengthen their team work.
My new roommate is taking over the whole damn apartment.
Have you told her that you need some room?
Last night I told her, that she can't put anything in my space, that is my room.
She should respect that it's your area and keep her stuff out of it.
My roommate is getting on my nerves.
Oh no. What are they doing?
They keep putting stuff in my room.
They need to learn how to respect people's space.
I can't believe that she came into my room and tried to move stuff around.
Where was she putting it?
She wanted it stored. She is a minimalist and wants my room like hers.
Roommates cannot do that. You pay the same rent as her.
Right. I had to tell her to stop.
What did she say?
I took some of Casey's money.
Why the heck did you do that?
I just needed a couple bucks for the movie.  I'm going to return it.
Why didn't you just ask him or me?
Well, you're broke too, and Casey's asleep, and now I'm afraid they'll notice the money missing and I'll get in trouble.
I'm not that broke.  Slip the money back and I'll pay for the movies.
I have been so slammed at work, I can not wait until August
What happens in August?
VACATION time happens! I am so looking forward to this break!
Have you already planned a destination?
Yes, the beach! I just want the sun, the waves, some food, and maybe a pina colada, I am so excited, I can't wait!
It's always good to get a break from work, I know you will have so much fun on your vacation!
Only two more days and then I'm off to Hawaii.
That's gonna be a great trip. You must be so stoked.
I am, big-time. It's been a long time coming.
Yeah, you've been working so hard, you've really earned this vacation.
And I'm going to live it up, I promise you. It's going to be a great two weeks.
Take a lot of photos please. I want to see everything!
I can't believe I was two hours late for school. I didn't get here until 2:00.
Did you get written up for being late?
No, but I got chewed out by the professor. And I can't be late again this semester.
Ouch...who is the professor? Must be really strict.
It's old man Kominsky. He's strict but he's a good guy. I should respect his class.
I'm impressed. That's a really healthy attitude to have.
Oh, man, I had a late night last night.
Why, what happened?
I was cramming for an exam. My class was at noon.
Oh? How do you think you did?
Well, my class was at noon, but I didn't show up till after 2.
Oops! You should go talk to your professor right away.
Here I'll get that.
Why did you just do that?
I wanted to do something nice for you. So you don't have to pay me back.
No, I'll pay you every cent back.
That defeats my purpose.  I wanted to buy you something, so no you are not paying me back.
Okay. Well thank you.
Carson’s phone broke so I had to buy him a new one.
How much did he have to pay you?
Nothing, I just gave it to him.
Isn’t he lucky?
I just want to be the responsible parent he deserves.
I wish all parents were like you.
I just got Carson a new phone. He is over the moon.
How generous of you!
I just think it is every responsible parent's duty.
I agree with you. Parent's shouldn't charge their children for buying them such necessities.
So I bought Carson a phone.
Are you going to make him pay for it?
I believe a responsible parent shouldn't make his child pay.
What should a responsible child do?
You always ask trick questions.
Those are the only ones worth asking.
I finished the plant experiment this week.
How did that go?
Well, they kept growing and every time they did I had to water them.
How did you keep pace with them?
I set up an automatic watering system.  It ran for several weeks.
Wow, that's clever.
These plants sure have been growing.
What are you doing with all those charts Alex?
I'm measuring the growth of these plants I potted.
Oh. How's that going?
Very interesting. You can see the weekly growth and the effects of different amounts of water.
Can you show me how to pot plants Alex?
My plant is really flourishing. I've been watering it daily for weeks.
How do you know when to water the plant?
I just monitor the plant's conditions and growth of the plant continuously.
Plant care requires a dedication.
Do you have any plants?
I don't think  that I am ready for such levels of commitment.
I really love taking care of my plants. I water them every day and even sing to them.
That's really nice. What type of plants do you have?
Three spider plants. One dumb cane. Lots of herbs. Orchids. And a cactus.
That's a lot of plants. I'm sure they will be growing like crazy with all your care.
Let me know if you want any cutting for yourself.
Hey we gotta break up!
I can't stop crying though shut up!
Ok, I'll stop but I need to grab my junk.
Yea
Can I come over tomorrow.
Come over tonight..
Did you see my presentation that I sent you?
Yeah, I mean despite the fact that we have been working on it together for a long time, I was surprised.
What surprised you about it?
Well I honestly was not expecting it to turn out so great.
Well I am glad that you have been pleasantly surprised.
Yes, you will probably get a great performance review for it.
The presentation went well I think
How so?
Riley loved it, we both worked on it hard
I think you did more of the work
I did but he wrote the speech
excellent job, you two
Everyone has said that I have had an interesting life.
And you have.
That is why I published an autobiography as a book.
I can't wait to read it.
Did you see the book I published.
Yes! I read it, it is interesting!
Yes! because I published an autobiography as a book everyone said that I had an interesting life!
I think so too. according to the book.
Did you get a chance to read my new book?
Yes, I have known you for awhile but I still learned new things about you.
I still don't understand why people think my life is so interesting.
If I wrote an autobiography it would take about three chapters so your life is definitely interesting!
I know my friends think I am interesting but we'll see if strangers agree.
You have travelled around the world and met world leaders so most people are going to find that interesting.
How are you doing.
I'm doing well.
I was really worried yesterday, when I heard about the accident and you being in the hospital.
It was a head wound and they bleed a lot, so everyone was upset.
Well, I'm glad you're o.k.
Yes, I should get out tomorrow.
I just heard the news from the police and I wanted everybody to know.
Did they catch the criminal who robbed our house?
They found a handful of suspects and want us to go down to the station to ID him in a line up.
Let's go!
The police from the downtown station just called.  My family was in the kitchen and called for them to come to the living room so we can talk.
Why did the police call?
My sister Penny is in trouble.  She got caught shoplifting.
Did you guys go get her from the station?
She's being held there until her hearing.
I hope she learned her lesson.
Okay let me compose myself. I have to keep it together.
Okay, I can have the folks come in now.
Okay listen, this is officer Smith, we have some bad news for you.
What the heck is going on?
Chaz was taken into custody for running a drug ring with a Turkish cartel from Istanbul.
Wow, that's why he was traveling so much to Turkey. He said he was doing charity work. Damn.
The police just called me from downtown.
Is it something serious?
I think so, I have to talk to my family.
Where are they right now?
They're in the kitchen, I'll call them over.
Okay, you should talk to them.
Jan wanted me to try again at solving the problem?
What problem is that?
It's this math problem we have to solve as a group.  We've been working on it for a while?
Is this for a class or something?
Mr.  Wilson assigned it for calculus and we are all stumped by it.
You guys are so smart.  You'll come up with the solution.
I think I'm finally going to solve this problem.
Isn't Jan the lead?
Jan's ideas have been failing, she gave up and told me to try.
That's a big opportunity for you.
I know, this could be my big break.
I hope you do well.
Last week me and Jan were working  on a really hard math problem.
How did it go?
Well, Jan had trouble solving it.
What happened next?
Jan gave up and let me solve the problem.
It's good to have two minds working together.
I am so tired. I don't know why the coach made me play almost throughout the game.
It's because you are the best player on your team.
I hardly made it  to the end. I was really exhausted.
It was all worth it! You are the hero tonight. You practically won the game all by yourself.
Yeah I guess you're right. It was worth it!
Congratulations, Mr. MVP!
Basketball is a game I love playing.
I do see you in the court, but always in substitution.
Yeah, my coach kept me in the bench.
Why?
Because I am the best player, so I come in when the game is not going well.
Oh, good for you I guess.
My coach tells me I am the best player on the basketball team so he kept me on for a long time.
You work so hard.  I see you practicing after school all the time.
I put in the work and it has paid off.
You are going to become pro one day.
That's my dream.
That's where the money is at.
I am glad coach let me play the whole game
he knows you're the best player on the basketball team
I am just glad that he has faith in me to do a good job
you have proven yourself repeatedly so you shouldn't doubt yourself
It was tough to bury my best friend in the army today.
I bet.  Sorry about that.  Where was the funeral?
It was in my friends hometown of Arlington.  Many soldiers were there to pay their respects.
Did your friend died during warfare?
I was there when he died.  We were both out in the field.  I carried him back with me to our tank but he didn't make it.  I was so devasted.
That's very sad.  I am so sorry.
It sucks that we have to be here at a funeral of a friend.
Its what we signed up for, but its tough to deal with.
Yeah, I've been to many and it never changes.
Hopefully we don’t see many of these again.
This is not something that we’re gonna be able to escape anytime soon.
I think that you’re right about that.
I can't believe they're all gone.
I know. But its over now.
John, Billy-Bob, half of my colleagues are.... dead
Its all part of war.
These guys are the only ones left alive
Yes.. an we are grateful
Thank you for letting me be part of this team.
Welcome we are glad that you are part of our team. Now we can get some real work done.
Yes, Please let me know what I can do and how I can help out the team.
Sure, we will make sure that we get you accustomed to our ways
I found a baby bird in the yard today. My son and I joined all this small branches and leaves to form a nest.
Oh nice! You saved a little birdie.
Yes, my son and I work great as a team.
That's the kind of relationship I want with my kids.
let's form a nest but it'll take a team.
We are a team.
It's hard to determine who does what.
We will work together.
I think we will have success.
I agree with you.
It was a very good team building day.
Did everyone have a good time?
Yeah, we made it the best we could.
It's nice everyone joins in.
We use everyone's  ideas, mine was to form a nest.
That was a great idea!
I have a new sure fire way to get a date. I told this new guy at work to have lunch with me or I'll have him fired.
You know that's illegal, don't you?
How is it illegal? Nobody gets hurt.
Its called quid pro quo. You can't condition employment on sexual advances.
Then how am I going to get a date?
Maybe you should try being honest.
This guy is just plain annoying
Who are you talking about
the new guy at work
what have you been doing to him
oh nothing.. Just.. You know?!
There was this man that I met at work.
Is he nice?
He would harass me during lunch break.
That must be scary.
I just don’t mind him nor comment at all
It is better that way.
Tracy is really a crazy person.
What did she do?
She attacked me out of nowhere.
Did you defend yourself?
Yeah, I yanked her head around to the ground to stop her, then I ran away.
It's a good thing you didn't stick around, people might misunderstand the situation.
I found out some great news today. I am pregnant!
That's fantastic! Have you told Mike yet?
No, I'm feeling nervous about how he's going to take the news.
Do you think he will be upset?
I just don't know how he will react.
I'm sure he will be happy to learn he is going to be a father.
I don't know how to tell my partner about the pregnancy
but you have no choice than to tell him
yes, I'm really not sure how he will react to the news
oh, you guys haven't talked about wanting kids?
no, not yet.
I'm sure he'll be excited.
Alex has been acting so weird lately it's scaring me. It started after I told him a lie about going to Sarah's house when I really was with Mike.
That's not good. But you should not have lied about that. You have to be honest.
I am not sure I want to keep seeing him if he is acting life this.
You probably will need to make a choice between the two.
Yes, I have to.
I really am not following, how did he end up at the hospital
The story is a bit confusing but its a good one
How can it be good isn't he hurt?
no he just thought he was dehydrated
oh, well what happened
He took a bunch of mushrooms, thought he was a cactus and went out into the desert to plant himself
Sasha!  Can you please explain to me what's going on here?
Well, Jesse....ummm, Carlos was walking by and the floor was wet and he slipped and fell.
Oh, ok.  So Carlos was walking by, and he slipped on the wet floor, and then he fell ....
That's right.  And on the way down he pulled down my nightgown to try to catch himself, and he fell right on top of me!
Oh, wow!  That's awful!  But why was Carlos walking by and slipping on the floor of our bedroom with the door locked from the inside?
It was...uhh...I think...Oh look!  A squirrel!
You want to take a ride with me?
Did you pass your driving test?
I did, now I can drive everywhere.
Were you nervous during the test?
I spent so much time studying for it that it became easy.
Studying sure pays off.
I am ready to start driving, can you give me your car keys.
Did you pass your driving test?
I did, I studied really hard and finally got my license.
That is great I am so proud.
Now will you give me your keys.
Let's test see your driving skills, here, drive.
I passed the driving test finally.
You can drive now!
I know it's been so stressful.
How long did you study for.
Five months!
Wow that is a long time.
I studied a lot, but I finally passed my driving test.
Congratulations. So you are a driver now?
I am. I was super nervous but I got a 100.
That's a really good score. I only passed by one question.
So you almost failed.
Well at least I would have been able to depend on you for a ride.
Well me and the wife are contemplating separation and maybe even divorce.
What? Why? You guys have been married for so long now, you can't work it out?
We keep trying but the money problems are really standing in both of our ways and it has been affecting our marriage for some time now
I'm sorry to hear this, have you considered counselling?
We could try but the main issue is we just aren't good with our financials, neither one of us know what to do to make it better
Well I am sure there is a better solution than divorce!
I don't know if my marriage is going to make it. We're having too many problems.
Do you want to talk about it?
We're having a lot of problems financially and can't seem to deal with it because we're having so many other marriage problems.
Sit down and talk. Get everything out in the open. That's what works for me.
I've tried to do that but I'll try again.
I think I am going to file for a divorce.
I know you guys have been arguing a lot lately.
It's always about the money. She whines we can't go on vacation or buy the things she wants.
Have you tried a marriage counsellor?
I want to go, but she says she doesn't love me anymore.
You have to talk to her again.
I was so excited to win the match.
Yeah, I could tell when Taylor raised your arms.
I think even he was surprised I won.
You were the underdog.
I trained really hard though.
Yeah, you definitely deserved the win.
You did it! You won!
I can't believe this. I've always wanted this.
You worked so hard to get here, you deserve it!
I've never worked so hard for anything in my entire life.
What are you going to do now that you are victorious?
I'm going to congratulate the other people who I competed against for putting up such a great challenge.
I had to wipe the tears from Lee's eyes.  His dog passed away last night.  He was his best friend.
It's hard to lose a dog.
Lee was so devastated.  His dog, Joseph, ran out onto the street and got run over by a car.
That's tragic.
He was right behind it and saw the whole thing.  He blames himself for not being able to save his dog.
It's not his fault.
Are you ok, you seem pretty broken up?
I can't believe he punched me because I forgot to return his pencil
You know he has anger issues and probably just wanted to hit someone for no reason
it just seems unfair he hit me and I didn't even do anything to him
Its going to be okay Lee, I know its been hard and traumatic
Thank you for your support.  I just didn't know how mean people could be
Yeah its a cold world out there for sure
Indeed it is.  You even wiped the tears from my eyes which shows how great of a friend you truly are
right.  that is what friends are for
Thank you
I had to wipe tears away from Lee's eyes after he confided in me.
Is it because of what happened to him last night?
Yes. I think talking to a woman made him feel like he could show emotions.
There's nothing to be ashamed of when a man cries.
I know but I think he felt a little embarrassed afterwards.
I'm glad you were there for him.
I just wiped tears from lee's eyes.
Oh man, why?
Talking about last night really got us worked up.
Yea, last night was really emotional.
Gosh it took me three hours to finally find the answer to the homework question!
Where did you find it?
In an obscure newspaper article from 1920. I'm so relieved.
Wow how did you know to look there?
I was running out of options. I had already checked every book on the topic and so I started looking at old newspaper articles.
That was smart of you. Congratulations on finding the answer!
Hey friend, how are you?
I am well, how are you and what is going on?
I am fine, thanks for asking. you know I was searching for an answer and finally found it.
how did you find it?
After searching through books and articles for hours.
Okay that's great
I couldn't find the answer anywhere on the internet. I had to go to the library to find it.
Wow, where did you find the information?
It was in this old news article from 1987. I searched four hours for it.
That's impressive! Did you find anything else interesting while you were looking?
I found something about a baby that fell into a well.
Well, that's kind of neat, too. I hope the baby was OK.
I still don't understand that math problem.
We all want to leave. I'll explain it to you later.
Sure you will. You always say that. I want the teacher to answer.
We are all starving and want to go to lunch. We're gonna miss lunch if you don't let it go.
I have a right to get my question answered.
If you don't let it go, I will hurt you after class. I am starving. We won't be friends anymore.
I really wanted to ask the professor to explain the subject further.
You know that everyone in class was tired and just wanted to go home.
I know, but it was a pertinent question.
You made the entire class sit and wait while the professor answered your question.
I know, and for that I do feel bad.
You will have to apologize to the class tomorrow.
Before we go can I just ask another question?
Taylor just ask later we all want to go.
It will only take a second.
Fine hurry up and ask then.
How much will the test count towards our final grade.
The test tomorrow will be about a quarter of your grade.
Do you have enough room back there in the trunk.
What? I can't hear you.
Never mind, we gotta get out of here fast before anyone sees you.
Yeah, quit talking and get us outta here.
Once we get a few miles out of town we can stop and you can sit up front.
Good, it's getting hot back here.
I just got so angry at my friend so I decided to lock them in the trunk and said good luck
That is a terrible thing to do
It is but who knows these days
yea you are so right
I wont lock you in the trunk or anything don't worry about that
okay, that is a relief
Addison is such a sweet friend.  The other day she saw that I was really upset and crying and she just put her hand on my shoulder and let me know that she was there if I needed her.
That's so sweet.  I always did think that Addison is a very caring person and I know she sees you as a really good friend.
I am going to her apartment later tonight and we are just going to talk and eat ice cream and complain to each other about guys, and jobs, and whatever...
I sure would love to come hang out and share my misery with you guys.
Really?  We would love to have you there!
OK, let me pack my overnight bag and maybe we can turn it into an all-girls slumber party!
I just don't know what I did wrong
Hey, man. What's going on?
Oh, sorry. I'm just...dreading telling my dad that I'm gay.
Hey, I'm here for you. You'll be fine. The rest of your family supports you, right?
Yeah, I guess. Hey, thanks for coming over to check on me.
No prob. You're a great guy and I just want to make sure you're going to be okay through all of this.
I was just playing video games in my room.
Man, it seems like you've been doing that all day.
I think I've spend the last several hours playing.
Why do you love video games so much?
It helps me pass the time.
Is there any chance you can pass the time cleaning the bathroom?
I think I spent close to 12 hours playing that game this weekend.
Is it good enough to keep you entertained that long?
Yes and I'm really good at it too so I just can't stop. I don't realize the time passing.
That actually sounds kind of fun. Maybe you should do it professionally
I hear there's money to be made in e-sports. Maybe I'll look into it.
Let me know if you decide to enter a tournament because I want to see you play.
Yo bro! wanna play Call of Duty?
Ehh I'm kinda busy watching TV right now
C'mon man we're such a good duo together we had 5 wins yesterday!
True but this show is great, I think I can get on in 15 minutes after this ends
Alright sounds good I'll talk to you in 15.
Great see you then
I'm starting to get really good at video games lately.
Don't you have work you should be doing?
Life's too short. I'd rather pass the time doing something I enjoy.
And that's video games?
And that's video games.
I don't know why Addison wouldn't show me her first baby.
Did you ask Addison to see the baby?
Yes. She said her baby was napping. I stuck around for a little while.
Didn't the baby wake up for feeding?
She did, but Addison told me it was time for me to go. She said she didn't want her baby exposed to germs.
New moms are funny with their first child.
I didn't get to see Addison's child.
I thought you were invited over to their house for the new born baby celebration.
I was, but Addison didn't want me to see their first child.
That sucks. It sounds like Addison's mad at you for some reason.
I went to Addison's house the other day.
I know you were expecting to see their first child. Did you get to?
No, Addison wouldn't let me see it!
That's horrible. How did it make you feel?
I felt really bad. I don't think I'll visit them again.
I don't blame you for that.
Yesterday I had a day off work so I decided to go to Addison's house in the afternoon to see her new baby and she may as well have slammed the door in my face!
Why would Addison do that? Typically women are excited to show off their new baby and are full of pride and adoration.
I think she is still holding a grudge against me for getting the promotion she wanted so she is trying to hurt me by refusing to let me see the baby.
The only person she is hurting by not introducing the baby to you is the baby. She should want as much love and people as possible in the baby's life.
I agree but her refusing to allow me near her baby did hurt me as well. I just hope she eventually gets over our quarrel and lets me into the baby's life at some point.
Give it a little while. After women have babies, their hormones are still kind of out of whack so maybe when her hormones balance back out she will let you see the new baby.
I don't get how you can live in a place that has such a dirty garage.
Yea I just don't have the time to clean and stuff.
I'm going to do it for you this time.
Fine, and thank you for cleaning out for me
Jordan lives like a pig.
I have been a witness to that.
I cannot take how dirty his home is, especially his garage.
Tell me you did something about it.
I decided to clean out Jordan's garage.
I hope he paid you.
I spent four hours yesterday cleaning out Jordan's disgusting garage.
Why were you cleaning Jordan's garage? He should do it!
I know, but Jordan's garage was so messy that I couldn't stand it and had to do something.
You should just talk to Jordan about it next time and ask him to clean his own garage.
I did, but he kept putting it off. I had to take matters into my own hands.
Wow, I love Toronto. The hockey hall of fame and CN Tower.
Did you have real Canadian bacon and some real beer.
Just a lot of pancakes and maple syrup. Do we have any? I am hungry.
No but we have some whiskey!!
I need that too. I may move to Canada and raise moose.
I am with you, ayh?
Going to Canada took a toll on me.
What did you do?
I ate so much maple syrup and drank so much strong whiskey.
How much did you eat and drink?
So much that I feel like maple syrup and strong whiskey.
That seems like too much.
What are you in the mood for?
I actually think I want some pancakes right now.
Wow you are so similar to me right now, I would really love some maple syrup and whiskey on that.
Oh for sure, the whiskey sounds amazing.
I was just thinking about my Canada trip and how much I loved the syrup there.
I've still never been to Canada and honestly I am quite jealous of you.
I think I’m finally losing my mind.
That comes with old age my friend.
True, but none of us want to be dealing with it.
It seems like we all are and can’t stop it from happening.
How do you cope with it?
I just take it one day at a time and learn to deal with it.
Now that was a close one, wasn't it?
It sure was! I can't believe we almost just got ran over!
I can't either! Where do some people learn to drive from?
I have no idea! Good thing you grabbed the wheel and turned us around!
Normally, I don't do that! It was just instincts that kicked in!
Well, I like your instincts that's for sure.
I'm taking the kids to the museum.
That sounds fun.
They like the dino exhibit.
I love that too.
Same
Haha we're such kids.
I am at the museum with the kids!
Are the kids having fun?
They are, they liked seeing the dinosaurs
Let them have some ice cream too.
I will.
I took the kids to the museum.
Did they have fun?
They liked seeing the dinosaurs.
That's good to hear.
Had to take care of the kids first and make some cookies
Did you feel the oats ?
No that was after I did all that
Glad you got it all taken care of
There is always so much to do! How do you juggle everything and keep your sanity?
No one ever said we are sane, but we just have to prioritize our daily routine.
I made cookies today, while taking care of the children, and I still have not gotten to feeling my oats.
Well now that the stuff you prioritized is done, go ahead and feel your oats!
But now I am to tired to even get up to get my oats! This is the problem!
Don't make me laugh to hard! Get your lazy butt up!
We had dinner with my mom at the Butcher's Block in the Millennium Fest, and I left my walled and keys on a table there.
Did you call?
Three times, but the place is popular and I can't get through on the reservations line.
You're going to have to go back to get them anyway.
Yeah, I know, but it's forty miles, and I have to cross through the metro area which is always jammed, and my driver's license is in the wallet....
Get John to drive you.
I thought my car was busted.
How could you not think about the gas?
I always think the worst when it comes to car trouble!
Did you really check under the hood?
Yes, and everything looked fine!
And it took you an hour to check the gas meter?
I think that approach can actually solve the problem.
Right, I thought about it last night.
You are a genius Carson, thanks for helping me out.
Not a big deal, I am here for you.
I am impressed by how simple it is, just as simple as gas filling up.
That's actually were I got the idea from.
I think I may have overthought the reason for the problem
Yea, at first I did too but it was pretty simple
Would you like to go to the gas station so we can fill up the tank
Sure lets go and we can pick something to eat on the way.
sounds great.
Carson was not feeling good last night.
What was he feeling?
He was complaining of chest pain and stomach ache.
Did he go to the hospital?
No, I just gave him antacid and sure enough, he was fine.
I am glad to hear that.
So I failed at my new job.
What were you working as?
I was a stock broker but only working on commission.
Oh, that's tough. I'm sure you'll find something else.
Thanks. I'm pretty bummed out.
Cheer up! Let's get together soon.
I realized I wasn't going to be able to make a living as a stock broker.
They work on commission right?
Yes.  That was the problem.  I just want to make enough.
That's tough.  What do you think you'll do instead?
I'm not sure.  I have a pretty strong finance background, so maybe I'll apply for a job as a financial analyst.
Good luck.  Let me know if I can help you out in any way.
I tried to work as a stock broker but I wasn't successful.
That's too bad. What was the pay?
I was paid in commission.
That's pretty hard.
Yeah, it was. I made almost nothing.
It's a hard profession.
I'm completely broke again this week. Living on my commission is not working out.
It's no fun to be broke, that's for sure. So the trading isn't going well?
I don't seem to have a knack for picking stocks. Maybe I should quit.
You're missing out on a lot if you're always broke. Remember the concert you skipped?
Don't remind me. Journey is my favorite band, but I couldn't afford the tickets.
I guess you've got some big decisions to make.
I finally became Casey's friend today and we went out to lunch.
Is Casey the person you've been working together with at work?
We've worked together for three straight months on this project so we got close.
That's good to have a friend at work.
It's hard to know who I can count on sometimes at work.
There's so much office politics.
I am glad to call you a friend.
We've been three months together on this project.
I know and it's been great.
Why are you telling me this now?
I'm shy and it takes me time to warm up to people.
Well, I've liked you from the beginning--I'm glad you now feel the same.
I hope Jan didn't get mad at me for calling her 10 times last night
I heard she was pretty mad and told her boyfriend about you
That doesn't sound good. I heard he wanted to beat me up
You better try and stay away from Jan because she is really pissed off today
Quinn is such a troglodyte.
I thought you like Quinn?
I do. I love Quinn, but I am the brains in this relationship.
What do you mean?
At the party last night, to get a first kiss from Quinn, I literally had to take Quinn's arms and put them around my neck.  Then, to drive the message home, I had to make kissy faces for 10 minutes until Quinn finally figured out that I wanted a kiss.
I hope it was worth it.
I finally got Quinn to kiss me.
Oh that's just what you've been waiting for.
Well, I kind of made the first move.
It's still a step in the right direction for your relationship.
I know, I am so excited to have Quinn in my life.
I am very happy for you, since I know how long you have been searching for the right person.
I missed you Quinn!
I missed you Addison.
Come here. Give me your hands.
You are so cute, making me hold you.
I am very cute, but not as cute as you.
May I kiss you?
I just got home from a babysitting job. It was fun.
Fun?? I've never had fun babysitting.
I took the kids to the History Museum. They had a blast. I couldn't believe how interested they were.
That's a good sign that they'll do well academically. Showing interest is half the battle.
That's a good thought. They're nice kids - a boy and a girl, they're my neighbors' kids.
I took the two kids to the museum today.
Which museum did you go to?
I had my neighbor's son and daughter. They love dinosaurs so we went to the Natural History one.
I love that museum. Did you enjoy it too?
Yes but mostly because the kids were so excited to see the fossils.
That must have been a great trip for them.
I was babysitting.
Whose kids did you sit for?
My neighbors kidse.
Did you do anything special?
We went to a museum.
That was a special treat for them and for you.
I had such a good time at the haunted house!
Oh yeah I know you went with some friends
Yeah I actually saw a good opportunity to scare them!
Well I hope you didn't scare them too bad
No they actually had a good laugh about it!
Yeah it sounds like you guys had a great time
So did I tell you about my date with Alex?
The dinner date? No, how was it?
It went really well, he ended up kissing me.
What! How was it?
It was amazing, I felt butterflies all over.
Oh my goodness! That is so cute!
I had a great first date last night with Alex.
Oh I'm so happy to hear that!
Yes, he must've been feeling the sparks fly because he gave me a very romantic kiss at the end.
Wow! Look at you!
It was really sweet. I can't wait to see him again.
I bet you can't!
I am in deep trouble. Stupid PS4... I have to stop playing video.
My bad, I keep asking you to play with me. I am sure you'll make it up.
You don't understand, the tests are important. I am going to get kicked out of school.
You won't. Just buckle down then you'll bust out some killer grades.
Well, if I get kicked out then I will go work with you.
I wish you could, but they are closing our Game Stop store.
I'm sure I failed my test today.
Didn't you study?
I did but I stayed up so late that I was extremely tired during the test and couldn't concentrate.
You really should try to get more sleep. Especially when you have a big test in the morning.
I got caught up in the moment and didn't realize how late it was.
Maybe it won't be that bad.
I am sure I just failed my test.
You mean like completely bombed it?
Like a nuclear explosion went off.  There's no recovering from it.
Why did you perform so poorly?
It's my fault. I was too tired from staying up all night, not studying.
Were you out partying?
Who's the man now. Yeah, I showed you
That was a bold move man. I didn't know you could be so bold.
Been working on being more aggressive. It doesn't come natural, but I've been listening to these tapes.
They seem to be working as you are more aggressive.
Perhaps sometimes too aggressive; looking now it seems I've gotten in too deep in this game.
Yeah, definitely too aggressive!
I won the chess match yesterday. I'm so happy.
That's great. So are you still in the tournament?
Yes, still in. I don't play for another week, though.
What did you do to win? Anything special?
I just went on the offensive and became aggressive because she was passive.
We are going to run the statue of liberty play because we really need to score here.
Are you sure we shouldn't play conservatively?
No are you kidding, we are down 14 with 10 minutes to go!
Okay, so we run that play and score and then what?
We need to do an onside kick because we can't stop them from scoring at all.
Let's score here and we can worry about that onside kick after.
I created a file for a new student named Cameron.
How often do you have to create files for new students?
At this time of year its really rare.
I wonder why that is?
I think it all has to do with students not transferring in and out as much.
Makes sense.
Start of the school year is always the best, getting to see the faces of old student and meet so many new ones as well.
Any new students stand out for you?
Yes, I meet a new student named Cameron today, quiet young fellow who moved here this summer.
Was he nervous?
He was, but I had him come into the office and we created a new file for him with his classes and a few of my student workers were there and joined him for lunch so I think he felt better.
That was nice of them, I am sure he felt better.
So that new guy Cameron started at school this week.
Oh yeah I've seen him around.
Well, he came into the office and I had to help create a file for him.
Did you need any extra information for that?
Yeah we had to do a photocopy of his drivers license.
That's not too bad.
I just got back from a meeting with my professor.
Oh why did you meet him?
My thesis. It's due next week and I'm having some difficulties with some final details.
Could he help you?
Yeah he gave me some good ideas. I'm glad I went.
Well I'm sure it will turn out great!
I feel quite confident about my thesis after talking to my professor.
That’s great! Did your professor offer guidance?
Yes, he offered a lot of help and guidance.
Then you will get a perfect grade this semester.
I am really hoping for a perfect score and I will work really hard.
Great idea Sasha!
Did I give you the good news about my job hunt?
No! Did you find something?
I think so! I spent a lot of time looking lately and found something that seems like a good fit for me.
Wow, awesome. How much does it pay?
It pays twice as much as what I was earning so I am excited.
I hope you get the position!
I got lucky today.
How so?
You know I've been looking for work in the city, right?
Yes, you've been looking for a few weeks now.
Well, I finally found a job with decent pay!
Good for you, Lee!
I got a new job in the city.
Really? What is it?
I'll work at a coffee shop!
So you're going to learn how to make coffe?.
I hope so, I can't wait to make cool art lattes.
That will be a lot of fun!
Did you know that people have issues with how I worship?
It seems like people have problems with how we do everything.
I'm going to have to be better at ignoring people.
I've become an expert at it.
Maybe you  can give me some lessons.
You name the time and place and I'll be there.
I love Jesus what about you?
Yes I love Jesus too, but can I ask why you raise your hands while worshipping?
I want to show my love for the Lord.
Well I think it's maybe a bit too much.
You can worship God in your way and I will do it my way.
Fair enough.
Wow, I am so depressed after giving up the baby.
Sorry Sash, but it was the right thing to do.
I know but I should have planned it out better.
Well, that's true but your boyfriend took off which doesn't help
What a bastard but I am dating his buddy now.
Girl, what is wrong with you?
I know it's a decision I made, but I still don't know how to feel about giving up my baby for adoption.
It's okay. You can talk to me about it.
I just know I can't financially take care of a baby at the moment.
At least the baby will have a good life.
I still feel like a bad person.
A bad person wouldn't feel bad about something like this.
I can't believe I had no time at all to do any shopping for my vacation.
Why is that?
I've just been working so hard.
So what are you going to do to get some clothes?
I'm just gonna shop for them online and get them delivered.
Sounds like a great idea.
So what do you think
I think I can talk a good game and see if I can get a deal done under the table
Let me just see what happens and I can work this deal out
Sounds like a good deal and let me know what happens.
Just got an info on how the deal is gonna be done quickly.
How?
Tracy had to talk to me under the table telling me on how to it done in time.
Sounds good.
Yeah, let's move.
Okay man.
Austin's family is going to come over for dinner tomorrow night.
You finally worked up the courage to invite them over?
Yeah, but I have so much to prepare.
I can come over before and help you with the cooking, that way you can decorate.
You would do that for me?
Yeah sure.
Austin thanks for coming to meet my family.  I know this is a next big step in our relationship but it means a lot to me
Yeah, even though we've been dating for less than a month, I think its important that I get to know you super well
Of course, and I want to get to know you better in the process
Yeah its a great! Both our families will finally meet each other.
Yeah I like this a lot and I think it is awesome
I'm glad we're doing this and excited to see how it'll be with both of our families
I tried to explain another reason why we are late.
What kind of reason do you tell our boss now?
I told him that the train we are boarding got an emergency stop.
Is that true? or are you just making it up?
It's true but our boss wasn't buying it.
Too bad for you.
I really like Skyler but I’m in a relationship right now.
She’s a great girl and I hope that she finds someone.
I have no doubt in my mind that she will find someone.
Yeah, hopefully you didn’t break her heart too much.
No, I let her down easily.
That's good to hear.
They just keep dying
I'm sure it will be in the end 
I really thought this garden would be great
well it was a good idea
I'm done with it, I think I'm going to tear it down and put a pond in
That will look nice
I don't know what happened to my plants, they all just died.
Did you forget to water them or something?
I thought I watered them frequently but maybe not because none of them made it.
Maybe you should read a book about gardening or look up some information online.
I think I just don't have enough free time to pay enough attention to the plants.
How much attention do they need? I thought they were plants and just needed some soil and water.
I'm glad we meet it's been so long.
Thanks for coming to dinner, it's been about five years!
that's right! such a long time!!!
We have to do dinner more often.
sounds good.
Tacos next time!
I had such a good time over dinner with my friend
Is it someone you haven't seen for a long time?
I haven't seen them in years but we finally met up and it was so much fun
I love those dinners with old friends you haven't seen in a long time
Yeah me too.
It was so great that we could get together for dinner and catch up.
I know, It's been so long.
I still can't believe that you remember that day when I tripped in front of everyone in high school.
How could I forget, it was hilarious.
Maybe for you, I still have the scar from the desk.
It's something you'll always look at and laugh back on.
I can't believe it has been so long since I have seen you man.
I know, it feels like it has been 20 years but it's only been 5.
Where does the time go?
Well time definitely made us look a lot older and definitely a little more fat.
Fat? I don't think so I have abs of steel.
Judging by that double slice of chocolate cake you ordered I bet your abs are really showing out today aren't they big boy.
I took the family out to dinner last night.
That's so nice of you!
I got a big bonus at work and I thought about what I could do.
That is so generous of you.
Thanks pal
You're welcome
Hi, how are you?
Hello, I'm good , what's up?
I just got a big bonus, so I'm treating the family and take them out for dinner
That's terrific! So the job is going well?
It's great, thank you so much for helping me getting the job.
I knew you'd be a good fit.
I got a big bonus at work.
That must have been a surprise.
The bonus made me feel generous.
What did you do?
I took the family out to dinner.
That's awesome.
How am I looking doc?
Your diabetes isn't very well controlled.
I figured, I've gotten to be very overweight.
I suggest you cut back on your food intake, losing some weight will help with your diabetes.
I suppose you're right.
Try cutting 500 calories out of your diet per day to start.
I'm not eating much.
Why?
Due to my overweight, doctor have advise me to cut back on food intake.
That's good, it's necessary for your medical issues.
Yeah.
Let me know if I can help somehow.
My doctor told me I'm going to have to go on a diet.
If that was your doctor's advice, it must be for health reasons.
I've been gaining a lot of weight lately and my doctor think it's bad for my heart.
I've put on a few pounds myself these last few months, so maybe we can diet together.
That's a great idea. I'd love to.
Are you nervous about your final exam?
Oh, Riley! I am so worried I won't do well.
I know that you will do great.
But how can you be so certain? I am scared!
Here, take my lucky rabbit's foot. It will help you with luck for your exam.
Riley, you are so silly and thoughtful. Thank you, you're a great sister .
So if I pick up ballots from the seniors then give them to you, their votes will be counted?
Yes but you have to go door to door and get their signed ballots then meet me at the shredding service
Shredding service? Not the post office?
Yes the shredding service, you will be helping the environment by collecting the signed ballots and bringing to the shredder.
But will it be safe to have all these ballots on me? Shouldn't I go to the post office.
Yes, Donny will met you there. He will be very proud of your service to America. Donny knows where the post office is.
That gives me a great idea.
What are you going to do?
I don't know, the story just gave me a few ideas.
I hope they are good ideas and not just a waste of time.
I think they will be greatt.
Do you want to run them by me?
Skylar, do you think I could use your phone to play a couple of games while I wait for you?
Sure Cameron, but just use the games that are already downloaded to the phone.
You mean I can't download any?
Right. My phone has been acting up.
Do you have something like hangman?
Yeah, it's on there.
Hey Skylar, since you are busy, can I use your phone for now?
What do you want to do with my phone, Cameron?
I'm just gonna go and play games while I wait for you.
Okay, that's fine if you play but just let me know if I get any messages.
Thanks and I will let you know if anything shows up.
Cool, I won't be too long with this meeting I hope.
I got to play all these games on Skykars phone when she was in the meeting.
That was nice of her. Did you play that pool game?
Yeah, I love playing pool. She was so busy with the meeting I played for an hour at least.
You need to get your own phone.
Only if my parents let me.
How much longer is the meeting going to last?
I'm not sure. There are still many items to discuss on the agenda.
I wish a cafe was open right now.
What else can you do to entertain yourself while you wait?
Can I use your phone to play games while waiting?
Yes, just make sure the volume is turned down so it doesn't interrupt anyone.
My feet hurt like hell.
Take off your shoes.
wow that does help.
It's been a long day.
take a drink too it'll help so much.
Oh yes good idea.
Ugh, what a long day dude.
Tell me about it. Did you get home safely?
Yeah, and I immediately started to crash. Took off my shoes right away and put my slippers on. The TV was calling me!
You deserved it after all that hard work!
Once I put my shoes away in the cabinet, I turned on the TV and immediately escaped into Game of Thrones mode.
Haha, I've binged that series too. It was worth it!
It's been a tough day.
Take off your shoes and put on your slippers.
I'll just put my shoes in the cabinet.
That's fine; you can put them in the closet later.
I could use a drink.
What would you like?
My mom sent me a bunch of cold medicine so I'm sharing it with Riley.
That is sweet of your mom and so kind of you to share.
I feel bad that I gave Riley my cold so I'm happy to share.
It's hard not to share germs in a dorm room as small as yours.
Yeah. I just hope we both knock this thing out and recover quickly.
You will. You have an arsenal of stuff to take.
I let Bailey have a free extra go at the ring toss at the festival.
That was generous of you!
I wanted her to win that big, stuffed bear.
Well did she manage to win the bear?
Yes, the final ring gave her enough points to win the bear.
That's great!
I would like to let Bailey take another try at the ring toss game.
That would not be fair.
I think Bailey has come so close that she should have a chance to win the bear.
If Bailey gets another chance, everyone should get another chance.
If that is what is necessary, then everyone, including Bailey should get another chance.
I think you are bending over backwards to let Bailey have a chance to win the bear.
I was at the Halloween festival with bailey.
I'm sure it was fun at the festival?
Yes it was, we had a ring toss game
Did Bailey participate too?
Yes! I helped her by having another try at the game when she needed one more point to win the big stuffed bear.
Wow! That's nice of you.
I just finished building a new gazebo for a client.
How does it look?
Great, but I'm worried. I exceeded the allowed diameter distance between pillars.
Relax. Just stay quiet and no one will know the difference.
What if the state inspectors notice it?
The state can barely notice anything. And even if they do, you can always slip the inspector a few bucks on the side.
I cant believe my roommates painted my room black when I was away at work.
What's wrong with having your room black?
It just looks so dark and depressing and I hate it.
Just tell them to change it back and that you don't like it.
I just don't like confrontation and don't want to do it.
I was having a deep discussion with my friends.
You do that a lot.
In the midst of the discussion I discovered what was done in my house while I was away.
I had heard about what happened there.
They tried to hide it from me by engaging me in a deep discussion.
I am so sorry for what was done.
I'm home! What on earth happened here? The place is a mess and half of the decorations are broken!
Your roommates invited some people over for a small get together that turned into a massive party when guests invited their friends along with them.
I am not cleaning any of this. My roommates are responsible so they can clean it up! And who is going to replace all of my broken decorations?
Relax, there's no need to get angry over spilled milk. I am sure they will get it all cleaned up today and you can buy more decorations.
No, some of those were heirlooms that are irreplaceable. This is completely unacceptable! I'm going for a walk to cool off and when I get back this place better be put back together or I'm kicking them out. I can easily find other roommates that will not do something like this while I'm gone.
Would you calm down, they are cleaning up right now.
I'll feel so much better during the day today.
Why do you think so?
Because I had oatmeal for breakfast.
What a great breakfast.
Yes it's very healthy and keeps you fuller longer.
That's wonderful.
I'm going on a new diet.
What kind of a diet is it?
Not a full diet, I'm just eating oatmeal for breakfast.
What are the benefits of oatmeal?
I heard it's a healthy breakfast and I'll feel full longer.
I look forward to seeing if it works.
I have to ask you, do you ever eat oatmeal for breakfast?
Sometimes, why do you ask?
My friend told me that oatmeal was a great way to start the day. Get off to a healthy start and have that full feeling for longer than I would.
Yeah, they're right. Usually a quick bowl of oatmeal fills me up to the point where I don't eat again until lunch
Well, nobody's told me this before! Wish they would have.
Hey, now you know!
I don't like that I can't fly.
Why is that?
I feel trapped all the time. I am supposed to feel the freedom of flight.
Can you ever fly again?
I don't think so, only in my dreams.
I hate my owner. I can't fly anymore. What a cruel human.
Well, look on the bright side, you get feed everyday and you have protection from animals like me.
What do you mean protection. Humans are the worst! They think they run the world.
I had my claws removed, so you are lucky. I can only pat you to death.
That is so inhumane even for cats that I really hate.
I am sure you don't know who you hate more. But let's eat. Its free everyday. Not sure where is comes from.
Hello, Hello!
Ash you are getting your wings clipped.
Ash fly Ash fly.
No more flying around the house.
No clip!
Yes, clip. You scare my guests.
My friends are treating me to dinner tonight.
What's the occasion?
I sided with them when they were involved in a business dispute last month, and my support led to a lot of success for them.
Wow, that's great to hear you were able to buoy their business like that.
Yes, I'm looking forward to catching up with them over dinner.
Tell them I say hello!
The other night I laid down to sleep and I heard a noise so I sat up to take a look around.
What was it?
It was a huge spider sitting on my pillow. I screamed!
How scary! Did you kill it?
No I just sort of freaked out and swung the pillow all over. Then I couldn't find the spider. I went and slept on my couch.
Oh my gosh! I wouldn't have been able to sleep!
I woke up my parents last night, which really annoyed them.
What made you wake them up?
I heard a noise next to me while I was in bed, so I turned on the light and saw a huge spider crawling on my pillow.
That's disgusting! I hate spiders.
I know, I let out a really loud scream in shock.
I would have done the same!
Oh man that was nerve wrecking.
What was Robin?
We were in the dark when I heard the noise on the bed. Then we turned the light on and saw the biggest spider ever on the pillow. I screamed in a panic.
Wow, that sounds scary.
We went to the amusement park.
That must have been fun.
It was fun and I had a great time.
I am glad to hear that.
When it was time to leave the amusement park in the late evening I did not want to leave.
No one wants to give up on a good thing.
My least favourite part of visiting the amusement part is closing time.
I know what you mean. It is always hard to end a good time.
Yeah we were having so much fun and then it was time to leave and I got really bummed out.
I guess that is what makes visiting so special each time.
That's true I am looking forward to the next visit.
Of course! I am hoping I get to go soon. Maybe I can take you along!
I had an exhausting afternoon at the museum.
What museum did you go to?
I went to the science and history one.
Why were you there?
I took Jesse's students on a field trip.
Sounds like Jesse owes you one.
We all had a great time at the museum.
I love that you were able to get the kids out of the classroom to do some hands-on learning and observation.
To me, that is the best way to learn
I've heard of a lot of benefits of that technique and will have to try it out myself one day.
If you need any help let me know.
Thank you very much, I appreciate you.
I think the kids are really going to enjoy the field trip.
They have been talking about if al month and seem excited.
I just hope they all bring permission slips so that we don't have any problems.
It would be a shame if someone cant go on the trip if they don't have one.
It'9s the little things that count these days.
More people need to be kind and do those little things because the world needs it.
I know, I'm just trying to be one of those people.
I'm following suit with you, I am going to do little things like that in the future as well.
Maybe we are onto something here.
Hopefully the rest of the school catches on and will have a whole community of people doing little kind gestures.
Jordan looked lonely today eating lunch.
That's sad, did he not have anyone to sit with?
I guess not, so I went and sat with him.
That's very nice of you!
I had dinner with my family last night, and there was a ton of dirty dishes.
I hate doing the dishes! What did you guys eat?
Mom made lasagne, but I did the dishes. She had been in the kitchen all day.
That's nice of you. I miss your mom's lasagne. I wish you could bring me some leftovers!
We didn't have any! Mom's lasagne never lasts long.
Oh man, well, next time I'll invite myself over for dinner.
I had dirty dishes.
You better clean that up before the movie.
They look terrible.
It's going to take hours.
I am sure it won't take that long.
That's true I just need to get started.
I made a big meal for my family earlier.
Did it turn out well?
Yes, the food was good and everyone was happy, but there were so many dishes!
That's always the worst part about cooking, isn't it?
I had so many dirty dishes after they left. I had to wash them all, one by one! It took an hour!
At least it was worth it!
Bosco's been such a good boy, I'm so glad I picked him up at the shelter!
Oh, I'm glad. I know you're giving him a great forever home!
He's been such a great companion and he's so smart, too!
I'll bet! Border collies are a very smart breed!
Can you hang on a second? Bosco's scratching at the door to go outside, I'll be right back!
He's got you trained already!
I'm in recital right now.
Are you in the performance group?
Yes, we are going to start the play today.
I hope it goes well, you know all your lines.
I hope I don't fumble.
You won't! You are perfect for this part.
This is a fun recital to play and I think that overall they will be a great combination.
This is a fun instrument.
I know. I always love playing for large groups of people.
I like how you're confident about it and have no stage fright whatsoever.
I just really enjoy performing.
I can tell. Keep up your good work!
I handed my boss the last of the paperwork today!
Wow Riley, you've been busy this week!
I got a little ahead of myself.
I think your must be their best worker Riley.
Well thanks I do try.
Keep this up and I am sure your boss will give you a promotion soon.
I really need a new car.
Ever since your car broke down our little clique has been suffering.
Walking and riding the bus is no fun.
What's your plan, are you going to repair this one?.
I don't know, but I'm saving all my money for now. I saw a cheap car that looked like it might work for me.
Just make sure it won't end up breaking down on you too.
I've been saving every penny since my old car broke down.
Are you hoping to buy another?
Yes. I almost have enough.
Will you get the same type?
Probably. I want a slightly used one and they have a lot of those in the dealership.
Good luck!
Kai threw a real scare into me.
What did he do to you?
He did it by accident when I was riding my bike and he pulled up next to me in his car.
Did he beep his horn at you?
He blasted his horn at me.
That was no accident.
Skylar has made the 5 year club!
She hasn't missed any days at work either?
None at all in 5 years.
Your boss should give both of you a week off from work, for being such dedicated employees.
Skylar got an award today for not missing a day of work in 5 years.
That's pretty good. Hey didn't you get that same award?
I did. I didn't miss a day of work my first five years either.
Have you missed a day of work since?
I have. But it's still a pretty big accomplishment.
It's a huge accomplishment. It's pretty rare these days to not call out at least once.
Skylar has been working so hard recently.
She looks like she hasn't had a day off in a long while.
She hasn't had a day off in five years!
Wow, that is dedication! Has anyone else achieved that?
Only me!
My kids were so scared of this thunderstorm
I'm glad you were there with them.
They enjoyed the story I read to them to
That's a good way to get their minds of the storm.
I made them hot chocolate too.
I am sure they appreciate you.
My kids were really scared by that storm last night.
My dog didn't like it either. What did you do to calm them?
I made some hot chocolate and read a story to them to help them relax.
That sounds like a good idea. How well did it work?
Pretty well, they seemed to be relaxed and fell asleep soon after.
That's good!  I'm glad you were able to help them.
The kids were so scared in that storm. I had to make them some hot chocolate and tell them a story.
That is nice. When I was a kid I just got told to be quiet and go to my room for crying about stuff like that.
Things were so different back in the day.
I don't want the kids scarred like we were.
I think I can impress the crowd if I play the new song I learned.
I hope they don't kick you out of here because they didn't even want you to sit down.
I'm sure as soon as they hear me play they will change my mind!
You better hope so because security is looking at you and he doesn't look happy.
You know my girlfriend Sarah?
Yes, I think we met before at one of your parties.
Well I was walking on the close side of the sidewalk next to the street next to her when we went out to lunch yesterday.
Why didn't you drive?
It was a nice day and we decided to walk.
I would have just taken the car.
I will walk close to the side of the side walk
Why are you doing that?
So I can walk to the street next to my girlfriend.
Aren't you supposed to be on the other side?
I did not think about that.
Just make sure to look out for cars.
My girl and I went to a new coffee shop today.
That's cool, I thought I saw you guys in the neighbourhood.
Yeah I was walking closer to the street because she gets nervous.
Was she hit by a car or something?
No her brother was, now she gets really nervous walking next to the road.
Oh wow, I had no idea.
Casey was the real reason that we won!
It was both of you. If she hadn't helped you, you would not have got that goal.
We make a pretty good team.
I think that you guys should keep up your practice.
Did you see the goal I scored!
I did, it was such a nice goal!
I wouldn't have been able to do it with Casey helping me out.
The two of us make such a great team!
You two really do!
I'm thrilled that my team won the soccer game today!
Congratulations. You played amazingly.
Thank you! I was happy I saw Casey near the goal when I was controlling the ball. I was able to make a perfect pass to her to assist on the winning goal.
That was a pretty epic pass that you made to her.
I know. We make such an excellent team.
You guys should start collecting autographs.
I love having Casey on my team.
I love you two a pair.
I assisted him and made the winning goal!
You should always play with Casey.
Yes! We make a good team.
That was an amazing shot. I can't believe that Casey made it.
Well you gave him a great assist.
Casey and I work so well together.
If we keep practicing we will be getting better and better.
I feel so bad for falling asleep during the review.
Did you just not get enough sleep last night?
Yeah I was busy studying late, but I wish I could have seen the review too.
Yeah it was actually really helpful. I can share my notes with you.
I would really appreciate that. Thanks so much.
Of course. It's going to be a tough exam, so I want to help.
I fell asleep during the final exam. I can't believe it.
That is horrible. Were you up all night studying?
Yes, it's such an important exam. I still answered most of the questions. I hope I don't fail.
Hopefully the class grades on the curve.
I think it does. I am going to ask the professor to see if he can help me out.
I can't believe Remy would say that!
What did she say?
She is just being very insensitive .
You should speak to her about it.
She is just so mean, she even laughed at me!
There was no need for her to laugh at you.
I really want to wipe that smirk off of Remy's face, she got me so angry.
I understand, Skylar.  She had no right to laugh at you like she did.
I can't stand her, she really gets on my nerves.
Just try to move on and forget about it.
That's easier said than done for me. I don't like being laughed at.
It's not worth your time being angry at her.
He really enjoyed the watch!
What kind of watch was it?
Its was a Rolex, his favourite brand.
How did you afford it?
I had to sell some things that I had in my garage.
That's so generous of you.
I bought my friend a new watch today.
Can I see it?
Sure, just be careful with it, I don't want it to get damaged.
I won't take it out of the box, I just want to have a look.
Do you think he will like it? I just want to make him happy.
Yes, it looks very expensive!
I got Jenna a new watch. Do you think she'll like it?
I think she will. She's really fashionable.
Thanks. I got it on sale.
Oh, it looks great. I would not have guessed you got it on sale!
Thanks. I'm excited to give it to her now.
No problem.
I'm kind of disappointed in my girlfriend.
Why is that?
Well I put a lot of thought into her gifts for Christmas and I gave her a lot.
Did you get any cool gifts from her?
No, she only gave me a card.
I'm sorry, man. You should talk to her.
Nobody likes me. It is so hard making friends.
Well you are difficult to get along with. I don't know who can take your strong personality when it comes to introducing you to other people.
That's really hard to hear, what can I do about it?
Maybe try and be a bit less defensive and more approachable.
Thanks for the advice, I will give that a try.
No problem Aubrey.
Sometimes I think I'm to fussy.
Yeah, you can be difficult sometimes.
Yeah, I think that's why its hard for me to make friends.
I'd think about it if I were you.
No one ever talks to me or introduces me to anyone.
Why do you think that is?
I can be a difficult person sometimes.
Why don't you change the way you approach people?
I can try.
I can help you.
I was stuck in traffic so I did not make it to dinner.
Remy must have been so upset.
It was beyond my control.
I guess next time, you have to leave earlier.
I was busy cooking and I lost track of time.
Try again another day.
I missed dinner and I didn't hear the end of it from Remy. He was calm but he explained to me three times why it was messed up that I didn't show for dinner.
He was trying to guilt trip you.
He succeeded. I felt so bad afterwards that I said I would take him out to dinner to make it up.
Was he happy about that?
He said he would feel better about that so things are cool with us again.
He just wants your attention.
I had to take the written driving test twice today. I failed it the first time but they let me take it again right away.
Did you study for the test before you took it?
A little. I thought I could pass it easily. But, I didn't.
You did pass it the second time, didn't you?
Yes, but it was embarrassing to fail it the first time around.
I failed the test the first time.
Did they let you take it again?
Yeah, I went back and studied the questions that missed.
Did you pass this one?
The study graphs you gave me helped a lot.
I did way better this time! I got an A.
That's awesome! I know the last test was hard.
Yeah, it was difficult. I learned though and studied hard.
That's so awesome, I'm proud. We should celebrate.
Yeah! Lets order some pizza tonight and watch a movie.
Sounds like fun. I can't wait.
Tracy wouldn't leave me alone today.
I am sure she was just trying to protect you from the sun by putting on sunscreen on your skin.
I understand, but she could have asked.
The hat was a great addition too.
I felt stupid wearing that hat.
You looked great!
I went to the beach with my grandma Tracy today.
But you are so fair skinned. Don't you worry about burning?
She brought a strong sunscreen and put a hat on me which I didn't want to wear, but it helped.
It was thoughtful of her to bring you a hat.
It was, but I am not really a hat person.
A sun hat is more of a utility item than for style.
I may be on my way to starting my own business.
What are you doing?
I am selling wooden furniture that I make.
Have you made any sales yet?
Yes. I sold a piece yesterday.
That is very exciting!
I recently sold a piece of wooden furniture on ebay.
How nice. Where did you get the wooden furniture from?
I actually made it.
Wow. That's amazing.
I spent a great amount of time making it.
I would love to see a picture of it.
I was just so sick of this guy constantly criticizing my fashion choice!
Good for you! You shouldn't put up with toxic masculinity.
I don't believe in such a thing, but this guy was being particularly mean to me.
What did you do?
I told him how rude he was being, and how someone of poor taste shouldn't be trying to impose his views on me!
Great, I bet that stopped him!
You wouldn't believe the nerve of that man on the subway train!
What man? What happened? Are you okay?
Apparently, he had to pee, but couldn't hold it, or didn't want to, so he just started to pee right on the moving train!
Are you serious? And no one did anything?
I did! I started to yell at him and rang the bell for security because their were children on that train!
Well good for you for sticking up for yourself and others!
Sasha really got on my nerves.
What was she doing?
She wouldn't stop teasing me.
That's mean of her.
Yeah I don't think I am going to hang around with her anymore.
Just focus on yourself for a while Bailey.
Sasha thought I was weak and kept teasing me.
What did you do?
Well she was going to beat me up but could not.
So did you end up winning?
That's right I won the fight.
I have never fixed a bike before.
Well you did a great job on Jesse's bike, the tire doesn't wobble anymore, what was wrong with it?
The wobbling was caused by the frame being a little bent, I just bent it back.
Good thing you had those tools in the car.
I helped Jesse with his bike earlier.
Do you have much experience?
It was my first time doing any bike repairs.
Did you manage to solve the problem?
Yes, I was able to rid Jesse's bike of its wobble.
Wow, great job!
My friend Jesse's bike was wobbly. I told him I would try to help. I have a few tools.
You know how to fix bikes?
Not really but I have watched some videos online.
Nice. That's how I learn to do anything.
I messed with it and was able to fix the wobble. Jesse was so happy.
You are a handyman.
I feel so miserable living with Skylar.
But you guys are the cutest couple.
Maybe, but he's so bossy. He orders me to wash the dishes, fold the laundry, and vacuum the floor.
So tell him you won't do those things, and you want to share the responsibilities.
I should, but I always just obey his orders and wash the dishes myself.
That's really unfortunate. You need to stand up for yourself.
I'm so glad I had the opportunity to go to the park last Saturday, it was way overdue!
Yes, you have all been so cooped up, I am sure it was a great day!
Oh my gosh, I had so much fun, the rides were amazing and the shows are always so funny.
I'm so glad everyone had fun, you all really needed that.
It was a good time, we need to do that more often
I was thinking the same thing, how about next time I join you?
I thought it was a really great amusement park. They had some awesome rides.
They really did. That Rocket Rider roller coaster was the best.
Yeah, that wasn't bad. My favourite was the Ghost Manor attraction.
You and your haunted houses. Those are always your favourite.
What can I say? I like the spirit world more than the real world.
I'll admit it, that haunted house was pretty cool. It actually scared me a couple times!
My friends and I were screaming our heads off on that ride at the amusement park last Saturday!
I heard that ride was a wild one.
That day was a great day!
That amusement park has so many good rides.
I know, we should go to it sometime.
Good idea. Maybe we can next weekend.
I wish that you could have come to the amusement park with us!
I know, but I had to go to my Granny's
We rode all the rides, and got cotton candy!
Amusement parks can be a lot of fun!
I don't know what I'm going to do about Sydney. She's failing all her classes.
That's surprising. She's so smart.
Well she's discovered boys this semester and so school is now taking a back seat.
That makes sense. I think my grades started to suffer at about her age if I remember correctly.
Well unfortunately if she wants to get into the college she's chosen she is going to have to pick it up. I've given her so many chances this year to do better but she just won't listen. I'm going to have to start grounding her.
Well she'll be mad at you now, but in the long run it's the right move.
Sydney is not doing well in school.
Do you have any idea why, Casey?
No idea, I am just supporting her right now by giving all the opportunity where she can improve her grades.
You are such a good friend Casey.
I am just doing what I feel is right.
Good luck to both of you.
Sydney is not doing very well in school at the moment.
I know, I think she is having a hard time learning the subject.
Why don't we help her, we can study together.
That might really help a lot.
Okay, great. I hope that it works.
Me, too. I would like us all to do well.
I have no idea where to put all this corn. I sold so much to the neighbours.
Well, I am sure they will buy more.
I am not sure. I cut the price down in half and its not moving.
Maybe next year you should cut down production.
I guess you're right. Maybe I can learn to make cornbread, tortillas, breakfast cereal or high fructose corn syrup.
Hey, that's the entrepreneurial spirit!
The harvest was good this year.  There's a ton of corn that I could sell to my neighbours.
They can make corn tortillas with them.
Corn anything. There's so much corn I don't know what to do with them.
Have you tried to sell them to the grocery stores?
There's this one grocery store in town I am selling it to.
Good, you should make a profit on them.
I'm very excited about my new business venture.
What kind of business do you have now?
I am growing corn and selling it to my neighbours.
That sounds interesting.
I also set up at the local farmers market every weekend.
I bet you get a lot of customers there.
I've come up with a way to make money.
Oh really, what's that?
Since I can farm, and have lots of land, I'm growing a lot of corn.
How is that going to make you money?
I'm going to sell it to my neighbours. They like corn.
Great! I'll buy some corn from you too!
I am so grateful for Addison and her help with my party.
She is really good at party planning!
Well I had been searching for a location for two weeks and was starting to lose hope.
She came through in a big way then?
Yes she found me the perfect location at a great price.
I am glad it all worked out for you guys!
Addison found me the perfect spot to have the party at.
Where is it?
Downtown at a rooftop bar. It's got great views.
That's so great. How did Addison book it?
He knows the manager and they gave us a good time spot.
Wow you are going to have a great time.
The other day I had to smooth things over between Kendall and Riley because they got into another argument.
It seems like those two are always arguing!
I know. I don't know why they even get together because they can never seem to agree. I had to calm them both down and get the conversation back on a good topic.
Well at least you were there to try to calm them down, but like you said why do they even talk?
I will never understand that!
I just avoid them because I don't want to be in the middle of an argument.
Hi, how was your day? I had a touchy situation at work, but it turned out alright in the end.
My day was good, the situations where I work are always touchy because I'm a massage therapist, you know.
So, a couple of my employees bickered over who would get to go to lunch first.
My personal feeling is that life is too short for stuff like that, but how did it end?
I did what any good boss would do. I told them to flip a coin. I'm the boss, so they did it. Amy got to go to lunch before Bertha.
Well, all's well that ends well, I think you did the right thing.
So my mom asked for money again. She knows I just got paid.
Did you give it to her?
I did, even though I felt really bad about it. All she is going to spend it on is booze.
Why do you give her money if you know she is going to spend it on booze?
I feel bad because she is my mom. I feel like I should help her.
I am sorry. I hope that she can get her act together.
I had no choice to give the money to my mom.
She's going to spend it all on booze.
She said she was hungry and needed food.
That's what she says but you know it's not true.
I know, but just in case she decides to do the right thing.
You are going to go broke supporting her drinking habit.
I had a hunch, I swear I did.
What do you mean?
It's my mother again, same time same look on her face.
Don't tell me she asked you for money again!
Yeah, and I give in anyway, and like I predicted she went and spent it on booze!
Sasha at some point you have to put your foot down and get her the help she needs!
I was right, I ended up giving my mom that money against my better judgement, and sure enough, she bought booze with it!
If you knew she was going to buy booze why did you give it to her?
I honestly don't know, maybe I feel obligated sometimes and her guilt trips don't help the situation.
I think you should stick to your guns and say no next time, she will deal with it.
I always say I am going to do that and then she starts making me feel bad.
Well her problem is not yours so let her start figuring it out without you.
My mom came to visit me today.
Was she sober? What did she want?
She was sober, she was asking me for money.
You didn't give her anything right? She's just going to buy booze with it.
I did give her some money and told her to go buy herself food.
Sasha, you know that's not going to happen.
Hey friend, how are you?
I am well how are you?
I am not well, It is a bad time for me, I lost my job and got evicted from my apartment and moved in with my parents.
I am so sorry to hear that.
Yes, I am very tense at the moment.
Don't worry, keep applying and I am sure you will get a job very soon.
I'm going to have to move in with my parents because I got evicted.
Oh no. I am sorry to hear that. Can I help you with anything?
Well, I need to find another job because I lost mine. So if you hear about jobs tell me?
Okay, I will make sure to keep you notified of anything that I hear about.
Life has been pretty rough lately.
I'm sorry to hear that. What's going on?
Well first I lost my job, then I got evicted and had to move back in with my parents.
Oh wow. That's a lot. I' m sorry to hear that.
Thanks, these things happen I suppose.
I guess so. I am sure you will get back on your feet soon.
Things are going downhill fast.
What seems to be the trouble?
I lost my job, I couldn't pay the rent and I got evicted from my apartment.
Where are you living now?
I moved in with my parents.
Did they give you a curfew?
I thought that I would make it to Alaska.
I am sorry that the moose jumped out in front of your truck.
At least I made it halfway there, before having to be airlifted to the hospital.
We thought that you were going to die.
Thank you flying up to stay with me in the hospital, while I recovered.
The truck can be replaced, you can't my friend.
Hello, I need some help!
What's up and where are you?
My car just broke down right on a gravel road going to Alaska.
That's serious man. How can I help?
It would be really helpful if you can get a car mechanic out here for me.
Alright, I will do that immediately.
I tried to drive up to Alaska last week.
That's a fun drive, did you make it the entire way there?
No, I ended up stuck on the side of the road.
That's not good. Was it a bad road?
Yes, it wasn't paved, just gravel.
Yeah, gravel roads can be hard to travel on.
I have know Taylor for a long time.
Longer than you have known me.
It wasn't until we found a hobby in common that we became friends.
What is the hobby?
Collecting stamps.
That is a great hobby.
Taylor and I have started knitting together and it has been a lot of fun.
I have never tried it, how did you guys get into it?
Well I have been doing it for years, but Taylor just recently started. We had no idea we both were into knitting though!
That's funny and you have known each other for so long!
I know, but nonetheless we have been having tons of fun doing it together now.
Wow, maybe I will stop by and you guys can show me how to get started.
Remember the jacket Carson gave me last month, the one he didn't want anymore?
I sure do, did it fit you?
Actually no, it was just too small so I listed it for sale at a thrift shop.
Oh awesome, has it sold yet?
It did, I sold it for $15.
Great job that was a very reasonable price.
I sold that old jacket Carson didn't want anymore.
Oh wow did it sell for much?
I got a decent price for it.
Will Carson let you keep the money?
He will let me split it with him.
That's great news.
Does Carson still want that old jacket he had?
The jean one? No I think that's too small for him.
Oh wow, would he mind if I sell it.
I think that would be fine, but probably best to ask him first to be sure.
That's a good point, I will ask him first thing tomorrow.
That sounds great.
Carson was really glad that I was able to sell his jacket for a fair price.
Thanks for telling me about it, it is perfect for me!
If he has anything else to sell I will let you know.
I appreciate that since paying for college is taking up most of my money.
Did you ever think about getting a part time job?
There is no way I can work this semester with 19 credit hours.
I can't believe one simple mistake and I am disqualified!
What did you do?
I started running a bit too early by accident.
I'm sorry to hear that, you trained so hard for that race too.
At least there will be a next one.
Yes and I'm sure you'll rock that one!
Man, I'm going to be grounded for a year.
Why? What did you do?
I got into a fight with a girl at school because she pulled my hair and Skylar called my parents.
Did they have to come to the school?
Yes, they both had to take time off of work. They are so mad at me. I do not want to go home today.
I had to call my parents into Skylar's office today.
How come?
Well I wanted to tell them personally that I got a promotion!
That's great!
I was so excited, I have worked so hard for this.
I am sure they are very proud of you.
Quinn really thinks I don't dress well!
That's so mean of him.
Could you help me out?
Of course!
Thanks, I am thinking of trying something new.
I'll take you out this Friday, it will be fun!
Quinn told me my clothes looked bad, so I changed into something else.
Why did she say that?
I thought it was hurtful, but you know Quinn she speaks her mind.
She is a very straightforward person.
I don't take it personally. I was just like let me slip into something else then. It wasn't a big deal. I was at my apartment.
Did you guys spend the weekend together?
You'll never believe what Quinn did to me at work yesterday.
What happened?
He said that my clothes looked bad for office wear and to go home and change into something more appropriate.
What were you wearing that was so bad?
I had on my little black dress because I planned on going out after work.
Taylor, that's a cocktail dress. Quinn's right - it's not appropriate for work!
I just got back from the drug store. I had to get medicine for my cold.
Are you feeling unwell?
Yeah, I felt ill all day but it's just cold symptoms so hopefully it'll go away after the medicine.
A good rest too, don't forget that!
Yes I think tea and rest will make the medicine do its job even better.
Feel well soon!
I can't believe they didn't invite me this weekend.
I heard some of them say that you are a loud mouth.
I guess I can talk to much sometimes.
Maybe just tone it down a little.
I still think it is mean of them.
I know but what can you do?
I feel really bad that I was excluded from everything.
Maybe they think that you're too loud at times.
Isn't everybody else loud though?
At certain instances yes but you're loud all the time.
I guess I have to find some new friends.
Don't be that person.
I studied for hours, but I think I finally am ready for my history test. I've got the study guide down.
That's good. I know you've been studying really hard.
I just need to get a really good grade on this test.
It sounds as though you've studied as much as you could.
That's true, I did. I don't think I could be any more prepared.
Then that's really all you can do. You can't study any more than you did.
It's been hours since I started studying for my history exam. Five cups of coffee later, I have finished my study guide.
You are so organized when you study.
I try. It happens with these sort of ideas.
History has never been my favourite subject. I just can't get into it.
If you study history, it makes sense why the world is the way it is today.
I am only interested in the present.
I can't wait to be done with this history test.
How long have you been studying for?
Six hours so far.
Wow, I bet you'll ace the test.
I better, I think I've memorized the study guide completely by now.
Well, good luck with the test.
I'm going to be so late for work.
Why did you walk instead of taking the train?
It's just such a nice day outside I figured I'd walk it. But I didn't think it would take me this long.
Yeah it really is a beautiful day. Hopefully your boss did the same thing.
I doubt it. She's all work and no play.
That's too bad. Well you'd better hurry up then. Good luck!
It was such a nice day out today!
Yeah it's been one of the nicest days all year
Yeah unfortunately I was late to work, but honestly it was worth it
I don't blame you at all! I would have done the same
Well that makes me feel better! It was just too good to pass up on
Well I think it's fine as long as you didn't get in trouble at work
I've got to get to this class on time today.
Hi Jordan. Where are you running too with the sun so bright and the birds singing.
I am headed to Mrs Knowles class. No time to stop and chat now.
Hey! Don't be rude. Is that the art class you've been trying to get into for ages.
Yes, it's the first day and I refuse to be late again.
Take it easy Jordan. It's nice out you should slow down.
I hear millions of people voted illegally.
Who did you hear that from?
From the President of the United States. Those votes shouldn't count.
The President also doesn't want to count COVID cases. Do you see a pattern?
Yes. There is a lot of fake news going on.
There sure is.
I thought the ballots were messed with so I contacted the election to have them redressed.
What makes you think the ballots were tampered with?
I saw people coming in to the precinct that don't live in this town and coming out very quickly all day to vote.
So you think these people are coming in with fake ID's and voting to skew the polls?
I think so, and I am going to prove it.
Well good luck proving that.
I am fed up with the election process that left me out.
Well some times you can't win, no reason to be so fed up.
No, I think that the ballots were tampered with, and I think that I can prove it.
How are you going to prove that it was tampered with?
Well, I am going to petition the election for redress, and If I am right, it will vindicate me.
I will do whatever you want if you think there was tampering.
I have been making up stories to others lately and I notice they seem to like me a lot more.
That is really sad though. Why can't you just be yourself?
Because people don't seem to like who I really am, but with these tall tales they love me.
Aren't you worried they will eventually find out the truth?
Not really. I am really good at lying to them.
I think that is a bad idea, and eventually it is going to catch up to you.
I'm just tired of lying.
Have you been lying?
Yeah, telling false tales to make people like me.
That's not good Aubrey.
Yeah.
You should try and stop.
I was served with an edict yesterday and I am still not sure how to proceed.
Who was it from?
It was from Carson because of my slow response time he said.
Well did you take a long time to respond to him?
I did, but I didn't think he would do something like this!
Well maybe next time you will be more responsive I guess.
Did I tell you that I found out who broke into my house?
No! Who was it?
It was Skylar and I am not going to stop until she pays big time for what she did.
Maybe you should call the police and let them deal with it.
No, I am going to deal with this myself because I want to see her pay.
This sound dangerous and I really think you are making a mistake.
Guess who broke into my house?
Who was it?
Skylar! I'm going to make her life a living hell. She's not getting away with this. This is war!
How did you find out?
She did it with someone else and they told someone, who told me.
I'm so proud of myself for getting my kid the game that he wanted for my birthday.
I'm was surprised myself that you put in that much overtime.
Well, I really wanted to make him happy since he cant see his friends with everything going on.
That makes sense I guess. I wish I had a mom like you when I was younger.
I earned some extra money to help support my child.
Let's save money and earn.
That way we can earn more money for a gift.
He's never had one of those.
I'm thinking Disney trip.
That would be great.
I surprised my child today!
What with?
Well, I have been working over time to get some extra money.
That's very dedicated of you!
I used the extra money I earned to buy him his favourite game.
That's amazing, I hope he appreciated it!
I bought my son a new bike for his birthday this week.
That is awesome, what kind is it?
It is a kids BMX bike that he can ride at a bike or skate park.
That is so cool, I did not know he was into biking like that.
I saved up for a month to buy this bike because it is top of the line, at least for kids bikes.
You could even go riding with him with your bike that you have.
Do you hear something?
It sounds like the cat is at the door.
I think I have to feed her.
She is probably starving unless she ate a mouse.
Yuck. I don't want to imagine that. Let me go get her some food.
I had trouble sleeping last night.
Why is that?
My cat was at my door the whole night because it was hungry. So I just got it some food.
Why don't you just leave your cat some food in a bowl?
Because it likes to have it warmed up.
You do know that cat owns you, right?
I don't know how she got outside last night.
Who got outside?
Bob, my cat, was at the door meowing and I let him in.
I thought you didn't let him out?
He must have snuck out of the window, I got him so food and water. He was starving.
We have got to keep a better eye on him.
Did you hear that scratching on the door?
I did! Was it a wild animal?
Believe it or not, it was just my cat.
He sounded like a cougar!
He was just hungry, so I got him a bite to eat to settle him down.
I don't usually eat sashimi. My parents know that. They were surprised when I actually ate it last night at dinner.
Did you like it?
It's not bad.  It's not my favourite but I can see myself eating it again.
I am glad you are branching out and trying new food.
My friend tries to get me to eat new and strange food all the time. She's so adventurous.
I am like that too. I love discovering new food that I like.
My parents were actually surprised that I tried the sashimi at dinner last night.
I'm surprised too. Did you like it?
You all think I am a picky eater. I just like what I like.
But did you like the sashimi?
Actually I did like it. I won't order it again but the bit I tasted was good.
I love it. Tell your parents to invite me to dinner. I'll eat it.
I feel so bad I sold Baileys gift.
Oh, she loved that.
I know, it's awful that I sold it.
Was she upset?
She was pretty upset, but I am going to find her another one.
I guess that might make her feel better.
I was so upset today.
What happened?
The whole class made fun of my hair colour.
That's really sad, were you alone?
Luckily Lee was with me and he reassured me.
That's so sweet of him.
The other students in my class are horrible to me!
In what way?
They made me cry today!
How did they make you cry?
They all made fun of my new hair colour, Lee had to come and comfort me
Well I like the new colour, so does Lee.
Lee warned me.
Lee warned you about what?
I dyed my hair pink.
That was not a wise choice.
The other students made fun of my hair colour but Lee gently raised my head up high with smile.
You should wear a hat.
I had to thank Lee for sticking up for me today.
There is nothing weird or wrong with your hair colour so don't be ashamed.
Thanks, you and Lee really are great friends.
I will dye my hair blue too if that is cool with you.
You don't need to do that man.
What are friends for if not for support.
I made a bad choice with the sandwich.
What was wrong with it?
The ham is disgusting, I think it's that cheap pressed ham with soy protein in it, and the bread is stale.
That's too bad. Would you like half of my chips?
Thank you, that's very nice of you.
No problem. We shouldn't come back here. You should write a review on Yelp.
I wanted to express my appreciation for my student's hard work they have all really impressed me.
What did you do for them?
I got them a gift card, along with a thank you card.
That's really generous of you.
I figured they could all use a reward.
You are the best teacher ever!
I had my last class today. I'm going to miss this particular group of students.
It's always nice when you get through to a class. It's an amazing feeling.
Yes. I gave the students a gift certificate to Best Buy and a thank you card. They worked so hard this year.
I bet that made them happy. They'll be talking about you years from now.
I gave my students gift certificates to best buy as a thank you for their hard work.
Those are great rewards.
I am just so impressed by everything they've accomplished.
And that they will continue to accomplish.
All they need is support and encouragement.
Teachers like you who really care make a difference.
When I was walking home from school yesterday I thought I saw a dead dog laying in the road in the distance but when I got closer, I discovered it was actually a dead person laying in the middle of the road.
That's terrible, I think I would have passed out from the shock of seeing something so horrible. What did you do?
Well the first thing I did was start to cry from fear and panic, then I pulled out my phone and called the police.
Did they think that you were involved? Usually the first person on the scene of the crime is the first person they suspect committed the crime.
No, it was pretty clear the body laying in the road was the victim of a hit and run so they asked me on the phone to wait for emergency services to arrive, asked me some questions when they got there, then let me go home.
Well that's good, that would be pretty awful if you were a suspect when all you did was stumble upon a horrific scene and report it.
I was really shaken up when I saw that guy dead in the middle of the street.
I would be too. What happened?
Just driving along. I saw him and stopped, then called the police.
Wow! What did the cops say?
They said it looked like someone hit him with a car then took off.
That's so sad! I feel bad for his family.
I just saw a dead body on the street.
What? Did you call the police ?
After screaming for a minute, yeah I called them.
I hope you are ok sweetie.
Yeah, I am more concerned for that poor person.
I was happy I got the new shed!
It was really nice of Austin to do that.
Yes, its 12 feet high!
That is one huge shed.
Yes, I can put all of my tools in it.
Now you won't freeze when getting your tools.
Are you serious, they cant be spouting this as fact!
I don't think the history channel has had real history in a long time.
I mean this guy is saying Nazis have built a moon base and are still operating it.
I know, last night it was about lizard people or something.
They are even getting the borders of countries wrong, why are we even watching this.
It was just on I thought you put it on, I'll change it.
Presto!
This isn't going to work.
She'll love it, stop worrying so much!
I don't know about you, but a bunch of bread doesn't exactly scream 'romantic' to me.
Flowers and candles are so cliché, this is unique and bold, have I ever steered you wrong before?
Yes all the time, but you do know this stuff better than me so I guess if you say this will work then I'll trust you, just this once.
I don't need to go to the hospital.
I have already called 911 and they are on the way, you head is bleeding and you were knocked out for 10 minutes.
I just fell off the ladder and hit the tile, it's not a big deal. Go and get a bandage.
You hit the tile pretty hard, and I am sure you have some kind of concussion.
I don't have any insurance.
It happened on the job, it will be covered.
Can you believe I fell and hit my head?
Where did you hit your head? Are you OK?
I hit it on the tile and I am pretty sure I have a concussion.
Why don't you go and see a doctor?
I might just do that.
Call me if you need help.
I think I got a concussion.
Oh no. You've been playing football?
No, I just fell down on some tile.
Oh. That sucks. Contact a doctor.
I just returned from vacation abroad.
Did you bring anything?
I brought lots of candy!
Thanks how much do I owe you?
Nothing you are my friend.
Thanks so much!
I had a great time on vacation and have something for everybody.
That's fun. What did you bring me?
I have to go through my luggage to get all the gifts I brought back.
I love souvenirs from other peoples vacations.
You know I thought of you everywhere I stopped for gifts.
I appreciate you. I can't wait until I can afford to go on vacation.
Water is delicious.
It really is.
This bottle of water totally quenched my thirst after exercising.
It's good every time all the time.
I was so excited I had to call my parents right away. I was accepted into college the I applied too.
That is awesome that you got in. Going to college is like a right of passage.
I know and especially that I got into the one that I wanted to go to.
Awesome, what are you going to study? Do you know what you want to do in the future?
I'm finally done remodelling the living room. I changed just about everything.
What did you do with your old stuff?
I sold it, except the chair that Jesse liked. I gave that to her.
That was nice of you. Send me a picture of your remodelled room.
I will, I have before and after pictures I need to get in sequence.
I think that Riley was reading my thoughts.
People can't read minds.
She knew exactly what I was thinking.
It isn't too hard to know what you are thinking.
Why do you say that?
You think out loud all the time.
So in the middle of the night I got up to get some water and noticed the door was open.
The door to the backyard? Or the front door.
Front door! That's scary enough, but the worst part is, my dog got out.
Oh no! did you find him?
Not yet, my parents are out looking now. I've been crying since then.
I'm sure they'll find him.
I'm down on my luck and depressed.
You need to have hope for the future.
Aubrey as been giving me hope.
She is a great friend.
Once I get through this I will feel much better.
You've got this.
I felt so depressed lately, on my last leg.
I hope you can feel better soon.
Aubrey talks to me often she gives me hope for my future.
I hope she can mend your wounds.
I believe so.
Just be careful, don't lean on her too much.
Sorry I've been so down lately. Everything's been getting to me.
That's understandable. Life can be overwhelming sometimes.
For sure. But I'm finally starting to feel a little better.
Yeah, I can tell. What managed to turn you around?
I had a long conversation with Aubrey and she put everything in perspective for me.
I'm glad to hear that. Aubrey has a good head on her shoulders.
I'm sorry I'm late. I had to go back home because I thought I left the oven on.
I do that sometimes too. It's really nerve-wracking.
Yes but it's weird because I wasn't even using it this morning.
I think it was because you baked all yesterday.
Right, I was tired this morning when I left so I was just having anxiety about it.
Well I'm glad you checked anyway. Better safe than sorry.
Jenny and I went to the mall yesterday.
Did you find anything you liked?
I didn't get a chance to look.
Why not?
I realized that I left the oven on and had to rush back home.
Wow! I'm glad you didn't burn your house down!
I think I need to run back home. I'm worried I left my oven on!
Oh no, seriously? Too bad there's no way to check remotely!
I know, that would be so helpful.
Well don't worry, I'll be here waiting for you.
Ok, I'm going to try to be fast. I'm worried a fire could start.
Yes, that would be terrible!
I feel groggy this morning after taking some sleeping pills last night.
Why did you need sleeping pills?
I haven't been able to sleep well so I decided to try them.
Did they help at all?
They were very good for sleeping but I think I'll need some coffee today to get going.
I am glad they worked even if they aren't easy to shake off.
I feel so well rested today.
You finally got a good night's sleep?
Yes, but only because I took some sleeping pills the night before.
You've never tried them before?
No, but I should take them from now on considering waking up this morning felt so good.
You do look like you have more energy.
I am still so exhausted.
Didn't you sleep well?
Not really, and I took sleeping pills and everything!
That's too bad. I have never tried them.
I guess they don't work all that well.
Boy, did I sleep well last night. What a snooze!
How did you manage that? You've been sleeping so badly lately.
I gave in and took sleeping pills. I couldn't face another sleepless night.
I don't blame you. It can start to drive you nuts when you can't sleep.
Let's hope I can sleep tonight without them.
Yeah, that's the hard part, isn't it?
I'm so sleepy right now.
But the sun isn't even down yet.
I have to pull the blinds together to block out the light.
You're really ready for bed?
Yeah, I want to go to sleep.
Okay, have a good night.
I am closing the blinds, we are both tired. Let's go to bed.
Sounds good, we have a long day ahead of us tomorrow.
What time are we supposed to get up?
We should be on the road by 7 a.m.
Are we going to stop for coffee along the way?
Yes we will need to, I need caffeine to help me on the road.
I'm so tired today. I did so much last week.
Let me guess, I saw something coming up in your backyard. What is it?
Well I have been constructing a patio slowly filling up buckets with concrete to support the beams for the patio structure.
Oh! I get it now, how far are you with it?
I am halfway done.
Keep going mate.
Could you move this bucket for me, it's awfully heavy being so full.
Absolutely, what are you working on?
I'm building a new patio around back, it'll give me a place to sit in the shade in the evenings.
That's a lot of work, but sounds great, I hope you'll invite me over when you're done.
I sure will, we'll split a bottle of wine.
I always love your wine selection.
I'm so glad I was able to get someone to sign my new baseball!
Those players were really friendly and they actually threw the ball with us too.
I couldn't believe they actually spent time with most of the kids.
Lets come back again next time they come to town.
I cant wait to do this again.
The Tigers are my favourite baseball team. I'm so glad we made it to a game this year!
Yeah, this is awesome!
Looks like some of the players are hanging out near the bleachers. I'm going to run down and see if I can get any autographs!
Ok, I'm going to stay here and wait on our hot dogs.
Wow! I got Miguel Cabrera's autograph! Daniel Norris' too! They are my favourite players!
Oh man, now I wish I had come with you!
I thought everyone forgot about my birthday.
When was your birthday?
It was yesterday and my friends threw me a surprise party.
I'm sorry they didn't include me in their plans.
You really missed a nice time, and I was able to open their gifts.
I'm sorry I missed it.
I can't believe my friends threw me a surprise party!
I thought for sure you'd find out.
I had no idea. They all gave me great gifts too.
They said they all tried to get you things you could use this summer.
I'll be able to use all of these for my big vacation this year.
I'm happy you were surprised.
I was so surprised all my friends threw me a party!
What was the surprise party for?
It was my birthday and they all got me gifts.
That is so exciting, did you like your gifts?
Yes, I even got this blue shirt, it is so cute.
I was trying to print some pictures last night of the moon.
Were you able to get them printed.
Yeah, but it took me about 30 minutes, just to find out the printer was not plugged in!
When it doesn't print always check the plug first.
It took me forever to realize why I couldn't print the images.
What did you find? I hope you don't need a new computer.
Nothing like that. Can you believe my printer was unplugged the whole time?
I've done that too. I get all excited thinking it's something major and it was the power.
Well luckily it was nothing major. I can't afford a new computer.
I'll be you'll check the plugs first from now on.
I might need to reschedule the birthday picnic.
What's wrong with the day and time?
The weather forecast said that it will be raining.
Oh, that's not good weather for a picnic.
Yeah, so I want to change it.
That would probably be best.
Guess what, it is supposed to rain half an hour after the birthday party starts.
Do we have anywhere we can go to inside?
No, we decided to do this in a park so we don't have a backup plan.
If it rains the kids are going to be so disappointed.
I think we need to figure out a backup plan and fast.
I can call the bowling alley and see if they have room for a party in case it rains.
I got a ticket for Friday.
Awesome I didn't think you liked that band.
I do, but I really like their opening act too.
Yeah those guys are awesome!
Do you think I can get a ride with you guys?
Of course! We're going to hit the bar up first too.
I have a great student in class his name is Jesse.
Is he a great dancer?
He learns fast, I still have to direct his hands.
Oh, I see, well dancing is challenging.
It is but I love to teach others.
Can you teach me sometime?
My dance teacher placed Jesse's hands on his hips during dance class.
I love it when teachers do that.
Ms. Adams wanted me to have the correct posture.
It's all in the details.
I've really learned to appreciate movement since I started dancing.
Ms. Adams is one the best teachers.
Jesse and I are having a lot of fun in dance class.
What kind of dances are you guys learning?
The teacher Allison directed our hands on our hips and did some sultry moves.
That sounds really interesting.
Hopefully we can have a full set to show off soon.
I would love to watch that.
I am going back to work today.
How long has it been?
I've had the flu for two weeks.
Do you think you're ready?
I'll have to be. I can't miss anymore work.
You should make sure you're ready, work or no work.
I'm so happy to get over this flu.
How long has it been?
It's been two weeks!
That's quite a long time for the flu, what are you doing now?
I'm preparing to go back to work.
I'm not sure that's better than the flu!
This flu has been killing me. I thought I was going to die.
That sucks, Sasha. My cousin had the same bug that's been going around. It's brutal!
I had it for two whole weeks! I couldn't breathe or sleep. I missed work that entire time, too.
Are you going back now?
Yes, I'm slated to go back to work tomorrow. It's about time!
Hopefully you can get some overtime pay to make up for the missed time.
I am so happy to be able to work again.
I bet, you were really sick for a while.
I am glad I have been cleared by my doctor to work again.
You can't be too safe these days with all the diseases.
You are right, I am glad I waited a full two weeks to go back.
I'm finally feeling a little better!
So will you go back to work?
Yeah, as soon as I get a doctor's note letting me return to work.
How long were you sick?
For two weeks!
Wow, that sounds awful.
Yea I have been married twice and I have two wonderful kids.
I'm sorry that you had to go through a divorce but at least you have two amazing kids.
Yes, I can't imagine how wonderful they are.
I know they are almost perfect angels.
I feel like a failure in my personal life.
Why would you say that?
I have very bad luck in relationships, I’ve already been married twice.
You are not the first person to experience two bad marriages.
Yes, but I feel like I am cursed and will never find true love.
No, there is someone special out there for you Kendall.
I just can't find a date.  Nobody wants to date a divorced mother of two.
There are plenty of people out there that will date single moms.
Yeah but I have been divorced two times.  People look down on me because of that.
You are not looking in the right places.
Maybe you're right. Maybe I should set up an account at Match.com
That sounds like a good idea.  I will help you.
I really don't feel bad for telling the restaurant owner the truth.
I don't either. Quinn is too much of a control freak to deal with every day.
I really hope she applies for a job somewhere else and finds something.
I'm sure she will unless they know her there too.
Maybe she'll get it and start changing her controlling ways.
One can only hope.
I had no idea that I was going to need this many surgeries just to fix a broken leg.
Well, you did break it in two separate spots when you were in the accident.
The worst part is that the doctor said she doesn't know if I will be able to continue to dance.
I am so sorry, I know how much you love to dance!
I guess after multiple surgeries I was hoping for better results.
Don't give up, the doctor didn't say it was impossible and you are a determined person!
So as a result of that wreck I broke my leg in two places!
That's terrible, were they able to fix it?
It took quiet some time, I have had several surgeries to repair the damage
Do you still need more surgery?
Maybe in the future but it seems good for now and the doctors are happy with it
Great, hang in there, it will be back to perfect sooner than you think!
Quinn took Georgia out to the park yesterday.  There wasn't much else going on.
Did they have fun?
Quinn loves Georgia.  He always brings her treats when he comes over.
I'm sure she loves that.
She's so spoiled. She has lots of toys to play with and treats to eat.
The life of a dog.  It must be good.
I was at the park with Quinn today and the dog.
Did you go to the dog park?
Yes, there wasn't much going on so we decided to take a walk.
It was nice weather out so I am sure the dog appreciated it.
It wound up being a nice way to spend the afternoon actually.
That's great, I'm glad you enjoyed it today.
Did I tell you what I did today?
No, I don't think so. Weren't you down at the park?
Yeah, I met up with Quinn! There was a stray dog running around too. Very friendly! Quinn and I played catch with him.
Oh I bet he loved that! Did the dog have an owner?
Well, probably. But I'm glad the dog came around because it was pretty boring and I didn't have anything else to do today.
Glad you had fun!
Quinn's mom dropped her off at the park since she was bored.
What did you guys do?
We played with dog and played on the monkey bars.
I bet that was fun, and you guys weren't bored anymore.
Yeah it was!
Kevin gave me a chocolate covered caramel apple.
Did you eat it?
I just took a bite out of it, I was saving the rest for you, since they are your favorite.
That is so nice of you!
I've never had any sort of candied apple before
Here take one you're going to love it
You sure? I'm not a big fan of sweets
Oh just try it and see
Waoh you weren't kidding this is delicious
I told you it was! Wait until you try the funnel cake
I hired Cameron to do the artwork for our company.
Really? How do you know him?
I knew him from school. He's a great artist.
I hope he's good for the spot you chose.
He will be a great addition to the team.
I'm glad you already knew him so you can be sure to get someone good.
Check out the painting that's hanging on my bedroom wall.
Wow, that paining is incredible. Did you draw it?
No, my friend Cameron drew it. I hired him to be my artist.
How do you know Cameron?
We met in school and became friends that way.
It looks amazing.
Cameron! It has been so long, how are you?
I am good. I am still working on my art.
You always made the most beautiful paintings!
Yes, I enjoy my craft, unfortunately it doesn't pay much.
I would like to pay you to paint pieces for my gallery.
That would be awesome!
I can take you home if you need a ride.
Are you sure? you seem to be enjoying yourself.
I am, but you want to leave and aren't having a good time.
You're right, sorry if I make you leave the party but I am not feeling well.
That's ok Kai.
Thank you.
I had to leave the party early.
Why didn't you stay longer?
Kai wanted to leave.
Oh, so you gave him a ride?
Yea, he needed to be home so I left and took him.
That's very nice of you.
I can take you Kai
That's ok, I know you want to stay
I do, but you really need a ride
Well ok thanks
I'm not gonna leave you stranded at some party
You're a good friend Robin, I really appreciate it.
This is awful where is everyone?
I know its such a nice day
Usually the restaurant is packed by now, I need to make some money
Wait what is today?
Its the 9th
Oh they are having that parade today for the Football team
I'm having such a bad day serving
Haven't made any tips yet?
Such a slow day because no one is coming.
You could always work overtime if you need it
That's a good idea
It was so slow today. I haven't made any tips.
You mean no one came into the restaurant where you worked?
It's horrible being a server.  I rely on my tips so much because I get paid like nothing.
Have you thought about finding another job?
I really need to find something that pays more.
You should.
I saw Bailey and she smiled at me, I felt so alive at that moment.
Do you really think she likes you back?
I don't know why else she would smile at me like that.
Maybe she was just being friendly?
I don't know, I think I saw her blush a little.
Well maybe next time go talk to her instead of staring at her.
Bailey was sitting across from me at the game, and she was smiling at me.
Do you think she likes you? What did you do?
Well, I smiled back. I think he's pretty cool.
You should go talk to him and get to know him.
I think I'll wait until after the game so I don't interrupt it for.
That's a good idea. You can get him alone for a second then.
What are you so happy about?
I'm not sure.  Maybe I'm happy about tonight?
What should we do?
I think we should go eat and then hit up a concert or a party.
That sounds fun.  I'm game!
Awesome!  Let's go do this!
I am having a really good dinner, but I don't know what is going on.
What do you mean by that?
Well this person over there grinning at me, and I have no idea why.
Yeah, that person is giving you quite a grin.
I know, I am going to just grin back at him until he stops.
That's a good idea to just do that.
I have missed you a lot.
We missed you too, its been a couple of years but still.
I know right, it's hard living far away from you guys.
You should come visit soon.
I will I feel really homesick, I guess that would help me.
The family will be happy to have you here.
How is everything on the east coast?
The weather has been beautiful here. How's is it on the west coast?
I miss everyone there. It's been years.
You need to come back home for a visit.
When I have time. How's the family?
We all miss you and would love to see you.
I feel so relieved today!!
Why is that?
Well, my family has a history of heart disease and I had a check up today.
I'm assuming you don't have any heart problems?
Not at all, my blood pressure was a totally healthy range.
Yeah, well you do eat healthy and work out a lot!
My blood pressure was checked out okay.
That's good. It's important to keep those numbers at a good level.
Yeah, I'm definitely in the healthy range. So that's nice to know.
Everything else checked out okay, too?
Oh yeah, everything is fine. Nice to know.
Sure is. Being healthy is the most important thing.
I know it sounds dumb, but I got my blood pressure checked today. It's completely normal, and the Doc says I'm in a healthy range.
Oh, that's great! Was is your yearly check up?
No. I just wanted to get checked out because of all this covid stuff. It's making me paranoid.
We all are. If I cough once, I think I have the virus!
Me too, except I was so paranoid, I went to the Doctor!
I get it. I think everyone is paranoid right now. Nothing to be ashamed of!
I finally got some good news at the doctor's office! My blood pressure is under control.
I'm glad to hear that. I was really worried about you.
What made you so worried?
High blood pressure is really bad for your heart. It's really dangerous.
My doctor pretty much said the same thing.
Whatever you've been doing to get healthy, keep up the good work!
I had to take the week off to relax.
Why? Have you been working too hard?
Yes. I worked 65 hours the week before.
Wow! That's a lot. Do you feel better now?
Yeah. I feel much better. I needed to rest.
That's good.
I need a break I have been doing way too much at work .
Weren't you working 80 hours last week?
Yes, crazy right? I think I will take next week off.
You should! You definitely need a rest.
I'm so tired from putting in so many hours this week
Would you like to go get a massage from the new place in town
That would be amazing and I could relax a little
We could drink some wine before we go and I think we would have a really good time
That sounds like a great idea.
I should have studied more.
Why, what happened?
I wasn't prepared to give a presentation
What did you do then?
I just made stuff up along the way.
It sounded okay though, maybe it will work out.
My birthday is in a few days, I am so excited.
And we are excited for you even though we only know us for a couple of weeks.
Your words make me feel really happy.
I will throw a party for you, just wait.
That is so kind of you, I'm glad I came to this school.
And we are glad to have you here, you are a great friend.
I'm so glad that I made so many friends at my new school.
That's good to hear.
It is. With my birthday coming up, I can invite them all.
That's great that you're going to have a lot of people at your party.
Definitely. I can't wait!.
I'm sure it'll be great.
My birthday is next week. I think I'm going to have a skate party.
A skate party is pretty cool. But you just moved in town. Will anyone come?
Yeah. I'm a senior so a lot of people will still come. I made lots of friends already.
So that's good for you. At least you weren't a freshman.
Yeah then I might not have any friends.
And you'd be skating alone.
I ended up going to see a movie with Sydney's wife in the theatre, it was fun.
Yeah she is really a great person isn't she?
Definitely, I love the way she talks about things.
Her and her husband are a great couple.
I really want to invite them to go do something with us next week as well.
I'm sure you'll have a great time.
Wow Sarah I'm surprised we never hung out before
I know and our boys are such great friends
We should definitely do something together soon
I think that would be great
I know a great cafe on the east side, want to meet Sunday?
Sure what time?
Sorry I couldn't make it to the game night!
It's okay, did something come up?
Yeah, my mom was throwing a birthday party for my dad. He's been feeling down lately so I wanted to show up and let him know I still care about him.
Aw, that's so nice of you. Was it fun?
Yeah, we watched some old home movies and my aunt baked an amazing cake.
Sounds like a nice time. Say hi to your dad for me next time.
Hey would you like to ride back home with me for the weekend?
All the way to your hometown? Why are you going all the way back there?
It's my father's birthday. It's his 75th and I really want him to be happy.
Yeah I know what you mean. People often feel neglected and lonely as they get older.
I want to bring him some of the pears I picked last weekend.
Sure, I'll tag along It will be good to see your father again. I know he'll be happy to see us.
Aubrey and I forged an alliance, but Aubrey made other alliances with my enemies and that's a problem.  Aubrey isn't loyal and didn't intend to honor our alliance.
You mean Aubrey screwed you over?
To be honest, yes.
That's horrible.  She's been your friend for years.
I can't trust her anymore.
People change.
I thought Aubrey and I had made an alliance, but they can't be trusted.
I thought Aubrey was a good guy. What happened?
He went and made an alliance with my enemies!
Maybe he was planning on being a double agent. Did you ask him?
Yeah, I asked. He was being a double agent for them, and never meant to honor our agreement.
That's a pretty horrible thing to do. I wouldn't trust him anymore either.
Guess what I found out about Aubrey?
You guys have an alliance, right?
Yes, but she's made other alliances with my enemies.
Whoa, does she intend to honor your alliance?
I don't think she ever intended to honor it.
I never expected that.
I thought my idea was pretty great.
Wasn't it good?
It was but others had some doubt in their mind.
What about other people's ideas?
They were sure about their decision, but not sure about my idea.
I know I'm right and I know that everyone else is mistaken, but I think that everybody else believes I'm wrong.
About what?  What are you sure you're right about?
The Earth is flat.  The entire idea of a round Earth is just stupid.  Don't you think?
Ummm....well...I have heard of the idea of a flat Earth before.
You didn't answer my question, Derrick.  You don't believe that the Earth is round, DO YOU???
Everyone has their own believes!
No one at the board meeting liked my idea, I could tell.
How do you know?
They all asked a lot of hard questions and seemed confused by some parts of it.
Well you told me and I definitely understand your idea for increasing profits.
That is because you aren't an old dinosaur like the people that I work with.
I mean they should understand your plan given that they have worked at this company for longer than yourself.
Don't you guys see that bloodstain over there in the picture?  The defendant couldn't have caused that if he was on the other side of the room.
The defendant is definitely guilty.  They found his fingerprints at the scene!
But it doesn't make sense.  How was he in two places at once?
That blood could have been from a long time ago!  I still think he's guilty!
Nobody would leave a bloodstain on the wall like that.  It has to be new and if it is then there is some reasonable doubt that our defendant didn't do it.
I guess I wasn't really thinking about it that way but I suppose you could be right.
Lee was skiing down the black diamond slopes like a pro.  Here I am with the kids learning how to ski.  I felt like my accomplishments were trivial.
I wouldn't make that comparison.
I know I should focus on me and my personal progress.
That's right. As long as you are improving, that's what counts.
Lee has been skiing since he was like four years old.
He basically grew up on the slopes.
I just got off the slope. Did you see what that jerk Lee did to me?
I did. Everyone did! He was a complete show off with his black diamond moves.
What a jerk! I hate that guy! I really want to brain him with my ski pole, the rat.
Calm down. We're here to ski and have fun, not beat Lee up for being a jerk.
Yeah, you're right. I am a good skiier. He can break a leg or two showing off like that.
Let it go. Let's go grab some hot cocoa and relax.
Where did you learn to ski like that
I grew up on the mountain
I mean I thought I had a good run but wow
I got snow in my blood
Seems like it, how did you pull that last trick off?
Years of practice my friend
I could not believe my eyes watching Lee move down the slopes that quickly and efficiently.
How long has he been skiing?
Since he was a little kid I think.
That makes sense, because he was skiing like a professional on that mountain.
I thought I was good but I have only been doing it for 5 years.
I bet Lee could do some competitions and do pretty well.
How do you do that without falling and breaking your whole body?
I've been skiing the black diamond since I was 5 years old.
Well it definitely shows, I thought I did well on the normal ski slope
You did fine, it just takes time and practice that's all.
So how much time until you think I will be doing black diamond moves like you?
Haha, hard to tell, just keep practising!
What should we eat? I'm super hungry, so let's just munch on something quickly.
I mean, we have cheese and crackers. Would that work?
Cheese might upset my stomach. What other options do we have?
We could microwave some hot pockets.
Oh, that sounds great. Let's do it.
OK, I'll throw them in the microwave.
This pedestal table is a great hiding place. Shhh.
I know, but aren't you afraid they will freak out when they see we are not around.
Well, this should fix their wagon if they think the can do what they want. They are still children.
I know but I don't want to freak them out too much.
Shh...wait, they are doing dishes and putting groceries away, what the heck?
Maybe they are growing up too fast.
Played a big game of hide and seek with Ash and the kids yesterday.
That sounds like a lot of fun!
It was. Ash and I were hiding under the table!!
That's a pretty good hiding place.
They eventually found us, but it took a while. The table has a big base, so we could hide behind that.
Good idea!! I guess they would have found you sooner or later.
Hey Ash, get over here, the kids are coming!
Good idea, they won't notice us under the table.
They'll be here any second now.
I can't believe I couldn't find anywhere to hide.
You've never been the best at hide and seek
Yeah, I guess.
Nobody will find us here.
We should speak quietly otherwise the might hear us.
I agree, do you think we should change hiding spots?
I don't know they might find us.
The room under the stairs might be a good option.
They will definitely find us there let's just stay here, under the table.
I'm hiding from the children.
Okay.
Come on, it'll be fun
Let's hurry up.
What next?
Shut off the power.
I'm sorry I was cheating on you but you never gave me attention
I havent showed you attention because my mom has cancer and I have been taking care of her
Why didn't you just tell me that from the beginning
Well, I really didn't want anyone to know because I would have been so sad about it
I understand now but I wish you would have just told me
I can't believe you bought me a puppy!!!  Yay!
I knew you have been wanting one since Oreo died last spring.
Nothing can take the place of Oreo, but I will hold a special place in my heart for this new puppy.
Oreo will be missed, but I know how happy you would be about this new puppy.
I am so excited! I am going to take him for a walk and show him off.
Sounds like a plan.
Hey I just got a gift for their birthday.
What kind of gift did you get?
I got them a puppy since it was so cute at the store.
Oh nice! What store?
I got the puppy at a local pet shop. I screamed because it was so cute and I was so happy.
That will be the perfect gift for them.
I have always wanted a puppy.
Then head to the store and adopt a pet.
I overheard my parents planning on getting me one on my birthday.
That is awesome.
Oh my gosh! I'm so excited!
I'm so happy for you.
Addison has really been helpful in planning for prom.
What is she working on?
She created a nice list for a sign up sheet, so it really made it easier to organize and make progress.
That was really nice of her to do that for you.
I know! I have been so grateful that she did that because it has saved me so much time!
I hope you get everything sorted out and the result turns out as you pictured it.
So Addison started the sign up sheet for the prom committee.
Oh that's exciting!
I just gave her the names of the people.
Okay cool. Things seem to be moving right along.
Yeah they sure are. I am getting excited.
I am sure you are!
Hey Addison, I was wondering if these were the right names for the prom committee?
Yes, they were the ones on the sign up sheet.
Okay, looks like we have a whole new crew on the committee.
That's great and I think the students really enjoy planning this.
I think it is the most fun part of the senior year.
Let's help them make it a great memory!
I was stuck in the back of the line last night while waiting to get tickets at the new theatre.
I hate getting stuck in the back of lines.
Me too!  So I finally decided to just push my way to the front.
Whoah, really?
Yeah, I felt a little bad.  I pushed Taylor but I did get to the front of the line.
I hope you apologized to her.
I am surprised I was able to catch the ball before the other player!
You have been training a lot lately.
Yes, I have been trying very hard to become a better player.
Your work is paying off. You are doing well!
Thank you, it's nice to know it's making a difference!
You're welcome. You should be proud of your hard work.
I think I impressed the coach today.
Oh, was it basketball try outs today?
Yes, I hope I make it in the team.
Well, you have been practicing hard.
I think I did well when I had to jump up and catch the ball.
I'm sure you did great.
I impressed the coach.
Was it your workout or your play?
The coach tossed the ball into the air between me and another player and I immediately took the ball.
He is going to make note of that.
I think I can do it consistently.
That sounds awesome.
Owwww!  What are you doing?
I'm trying to see how bad the gash is on your head!  That sword almost cut your head off!
Well, it hurts, Taylor!  You shouldn't have hit me so hard.
You're the one who said you were a trained Samurai and could block any strike I could make!
So anyways, how bad is it?  Is my brain damaged?
No, silly.  But you're gonna need stitches.  Let me get you to the hospital.
I'm wondering if I should refund the money all my friends and family gave me for my statues.
Why do you have to refund their money?
They all bought some sculptures from me to be supportive. But the sculptures all disintegrated into dust.
Why don't you just make them more sculptures?
Because I think they would just turn into dust too.
Oh.
I sold all my homemade sculptures I made.
Who bought them?
My family did because they were trying to be supportive.
That was nice of them. How are they liking the sculptures?
Well actually they all disintegrated into dust and I am really ashamed.
Hey you didn't know. I am sure they understand. This will just help you improve your skills.
I should have won
2nd is not bad at all you did great
I've been training for months!
Next time, you did great for your first competition
I could have done better
Don't be so hard on yourself
Hard work and dedication never fails!
What are you so uppity and motivational about?
Today is the end of month 4, and guess what! I met my weight goal! 135 pounds!
Woah weren't you like 180 when you started?
Yes ma'am I did it intelligently by eating well and exercising 40 minutes a day!
Good job! Maybe I'll start a diet too!
I'm so excited!!!! Guess why?
Tell me!!! I can't wait to hear! Did you win the lottery?
No, not that good, but, all the dieting and exercising I've been doing has paid off!
That's fantastic!!! Tell me more!
I lost ten pounds! I'm so happy!
That's great Kendall! I'm so happy for you! We should exercise together!
I can't believe I lost ten pounds, can you tell?
Oh I can tell for sure that you lost weight.
I am so happy that I reached my goal.
You just look so much healthier. How did you do it?
Dieting and exercising really is all I did.
Well you are such an inspiration.
Are you still interested in trying out for the squad?
Well yes, but I thought try outs were over.
They are, but you were sick and couldn't make it. I thought we'd make an exception.
I would really appreciate it.
You're welcome. I'd heard only great things about your ability and wanted to find out if you were as good as people say.
I'd be happy to prove that I am. When did you want to schedule the try out?
We gave Bailey another chance to try out for the squad.
That is only fair, since she missed it for a good reason.
We all decided that since she was sick, it was not her fault.
When will she be trying out for the squad?
Oooh Riley, when did you get so feisty? Pulling me in for a kiss like that. I should accuse you of assault!
And when did you start looking so beautiful Ash?
I've always been hot, you just didn't notice because you always had a girlfriend.
Maybe. But I think I would have noticed you.
So shall we take this party somewhere more intimate?
Sounds good to me! My apartment or yours?
I had a great time at the zoo the other day.
Did you see some animals?
Yes, I saw some cool animals and was able to get right up close to them.
Did anyone go with you?
No, I went by myself.
I'm glad you had a good time.
I was so bored and no one was around so I took a ride to the zoo.
Kai, I was free today. I was also very bored.
I left you a message. You never replied
Oh okay. aI did house work anyway. How was the zoo?
I was able to convince the zookeeper to let me feed the lions and bears.
Cool how did that go?
I went to the zoo today!
That's awesome. Who did you go with?
Well, plans fell through so I ended up going alone.
Oh, I'm sorry for that.
No, it was worth it. I got to see the lemurs up close.
Oh, nice. They are so cute!
I just took my dog out. I had forgotten to do it this morning.
I'm glad you remembered to do it now. Did he go in the house or anything?
Thankfully, no, he didn't go. And I'm sure he needed to go out for a while.
Were you busy with something and just forgot?
Yeah, I started doing the laundry, and it just completely slipped my mind.
I see, you just got distracted.
I feel bad I didn't take my dog for a walk this morning.
I bet he was waiting at the door for you just waiting to go for a walk
Yea, he wanted to go as soon as I got home and couldn't wait for me to go
Did you guys have a good time on the walk then
We had a good walk and he went to sleep right when we got home
Today was a good day. One of my apprentices finally advanced in his career.
That's good news! Was it Alex?
Yeah, Alex. He's been working hard for years now. It was a little bleak for a while, especially when his day job started encroaching on his free time. But he never faltered and finally passed my tests!
Great. Will he be performing plumbing tasks on his own now?
Nope. That's the next step after this. Now he'll be able to go on jobs with me and see how things are really done.
Good for him.
I am proud that Alex hung in there with me and is ready for these next steps.
I know Alex is happy and excited too.
Yeah and there isn't anyone I'd rather be on this journey with.
You two work very well together and will do great things.
Alex was the best apprentice I've had in years. He'll be a great master.
He is a nice guy. I'm sure he'll make a great master.
I appreciate all the work you've done with me these past few years.
I appreciate you letting me work with you.
I think you are ready to move on.
You're letting me go?
No, I want to promote you to the next step!
Oh, wow! Thank you!
I've decided to see the whole country.
How? Do you have time for that?
I'm driving it. I'm hoping to buy an rv one day. I'm retired anyway.
Wow...that's quite the adventure.
I'm looking forward to the relaxation and meeting new people.
I may join you on some of your road trips.
It is nice to get away from the smog and into the country.
This is good, I'm glad we drove out here today.
I certainly don't miss the hustle and bustle of the city.
I sure don't either.
I want to see what all the country has to offer.
It is a lot different than the city.
I went for a long drive to see the country and get out of the city.
That'd be a great change.
It really is the best thing. My mind was  at peace.
Sometimes you really need to get away.
I stayed at a farm and milked cows.
Did you grow up on a farm?
I drove by so many farms.
Did you see any cows?
Yep, tons of them.
Where are the pictures?
I can't take a pic while driving.
Aw, I want to see cows!
I'm glad I know advanced first aid.
When did you use your first aid skills?
I was cutting something and slit my thumb on the blade.
Was there a big gash?
Not really, but it was bleeding a lot.
That's definitely a time for advanced first aid.
My thumb is one fire right now
What happened to it Cameron, it looks sore
I was cutting up some pieces of timber when the saw slipped and slit my thumb
Ouch! It must have hurt!
It did. But at least I feel better now
Go to a doctor and get it checked right now!
I cannot believe i cut myself trying to dice peppers again.
You need to be more careful man.
Believe me I know, I’m going to run out of bandages before the week is up at this rate.
Did you cut yourself earlier this week?
Yeah I was using a hand dicer for potatoes and did the same thing.
Maybe you aren’t supposed to work in a kitchen.
That building was just burning like crazy when we got there.  We had to call the fire department to put out the flames.
Why were you there?
We were invited to a party.  That was the address we were given.
Did the fire department put out the flames?
They did but it was already too late.  The building has already burnt to the ground pretty much.  We just heard that two people died.
That's tragic.
I can't wait for my tax refund to come in the mail but I hate going out to check the mail everyday.
Why? I love checking the mail to see what new ads come in and if you're expecting a nice check, that should give you a motivation to check your mail.
The check would be nice but every time I go out there and it's not in my mail box I just get a wave of disappointment that overcomes me.
While that may be depressing, it may make it even better when it finally does arrive.
Yes, but it is taking so long that all the bills I am getting in the mail in the mean time are just going to eat the entire check up.
Yeah, I guess that does suck. Sounds like it is actually taking the excitement away little by little when It doesn't come in the mail day after day.
I wish our driveway wasn't so long.
Why's that?
It makes checking the mail way too difficult.
Why don't you just check it on the way home from work?
I would, but I'm expecting a check and I need the money so I'm checking all the time.
Ah, makes sense.
you can't believe where I went yesterday evening
Where were you Sasha
I was invited by Bob's parents for dinner
wait! the good looking Bob?
yeah! The food was awesome, I loved the flavours, I have to thank them for that sweet food
You are lucky Sasha. He has never invited anyone there
Have you tried the new taco truck?
I only heard about it yesterday. Did you?
I had dinner there yesterday. The food is awesome
Do they have dine-in services?
You just buy the food and enjoy it on a bench under a jacaranda tree. My meal was so tasty, I still thank them when I pass by on my way to the office.
I'm definitely going to try it.
This dinner was so good!
I'm glad to hear that.
It's so rich and complex. It's savory but also delicate. What did you put in it?
The usual salt, pepper, and garlic, and the secret is a bit of ginger.
Oh! That makes sense. It gives it such a nice flavor.
Yeah, I loved this recipe. I'll send it to you!
My mind is going crazy thinking about work.
You must have been busy this week.
It has been really busy, I can't think about anything else.
You should try to relax, and hang out with us.
No, I think I should go in case I get a call or email.
Okay, well maybe we can hang out some other time then.
I didn't enjoy myself at his party at all.
Why not? You were really excited about it 
All I could think about was my mom having cancer.
You need to relax a little and have some fun.
I know, but I don't feel like socializing with people right now.
I get it, but take care of yourself.
I'm really sorry, but I am so worried that my dog is sick right now and home alone.
I understand that is a scary thing.
I don't even feel like having fun at the party.
Why don't you leave and make sure your dog is ok?
You won't mind? I would like to go.
No that's fine. I hope he gets better.
The kids are gone and I am alone in this house.
You really don't need four bedrooms.
I am getting ready to move because I need to downsize and get rid of a lot of possessions.
Where will you start?
Do you want any lamps or sofas or beds or tables or kitchen utensils or framed art work or rugs or another dog?
Haha, I will take the dog.
I still have some stuff that I am giving away if you want to stop by and have a look.
Sure thing. I could stop by this afternoon if that works for you!
Yes that would be great. I need to get rid of it all.
Why do you need to get rid of so many things?
I am moving and downsizing so it has to go.
Well I guess then your loss is my gain!
My new house is a lot smaller than I thought, I don't think I can bring all this stuff with me
Oh no, well I will take that sofa off your hands if you would like haha
Seriously that would help me out a lot, I need to downsize before I move in
What about getting a storage unit?
That is a good idea, I will store what I don't want to get rid off
Don't throw anything away without asking me please, I am need of household items
I really want this new game.
Why can't you buy it?
I don't have enough money to buy it.
So what are you going to do?
I think I'm going to ask my mom for some money.
That's a good idea.
I wanted to buy a new game but I was short 30.00
Games are so expansive!
I am going to save the money this week
How
I am going to carry my lunch to work
That is a good way to save money!
Things aren't going too well for me.
Sorry to hear about that. What's bothering you?
I really wanted to buy a new game but I couldn't afford it.
Games are getting pretty expensive these days. I think they go for like $60 these days.
I know but I can't afford the one I want. Maybe I'll wait until it's on sale.
That might be a good idea. I personally try to save every penny I have because it might come in handy some day.
I was so mad at the kids today. They were running around the kitchen.
Oh no.
They broke some of the pots because of it.
Oh, that's not good.
So I showed them the pots to really show them why they shouldn't be so rowdy.
I'm sure they didn't mean it.
I showed them the pots they broke
that's a fine lesson for the future
yeah they need to learn that it isn't nice to break things
they run wild way too much
too much sugar in their system
time to cut down
I can't believe them, those pots were so expensive.
They are kids, they don't know any better.
Well now they do, I made them help me clean up the kitchen after.
With all that glass on the floor?
No I meant just wiping the counters and putting away the silverware.
Oh, okay.
I'm so tired. Sasha woke me up screaming last night.
Oh no, what happened?!
She thought she saw a monster in her closet.
Oh haha. What did you do?
I turned on the lights and showed her it was just her large stuffed bear.
That's too funny. Better stick to the smaller stuffed animals from now on.
The experiment I chose wasn't as cool as Casey's. His was just so exciting to watch.
Carson. You need to have confidence in your choices. Yes Casey's had visual appeal, but I think yours was great too.
You think so? The class would have just yawned if I did my experiement.
Who gives the grade? The professor, or the class? You know the answer.
I think you're right but its too late now.
Maybe you should talk to the professor so he see's what you originally were going to do. It might help.
I'm doing this as a favor to Casey. She didn't want to try it in class.
Did you work on it with her?
No but I know what it is supposed to do. She left me notes.
Why didn't she want to do it herself.
I don't know. I guess she just isn't as confident about her experiment as she should be.
If she is going to be this brilliant scientist, she needs to get comfortable demonstrating her own experiments.
I'm going to clean up soon.
Yea it's big party I'll help.
Let's all work together.
I'm happy to help.
Others won't help.
Let's all work together.
Monica made the birthday cake so I had to clean up up after the big birthday party.  I wiped the cake crumbs off the table.  Then put the dishes into the sink.
You are so thorough when you clean.
I would make a good roommate.
Is that a hint?  I am looking for a new roommate.  Mine graduated and went back home.
My lease is up next month.  It would be fun for us to be roommates.
Let's do it.
I'm still cleaning up after the birthday party.
Was there really that much to clean?
Well no one stayed to help. And it was a big birthday party so a lot of work.
But did you guys mostly eat outside?
We had the cake indoors. I started by putting the dishes in the sink and cleaning up the crumbs from the cake.
But at least there won't be much to do outside.
After the party, it is time to clean up.
I didn't know you had a big birthday party.
I just invited friends from work. Can you help me?
Let me help you put the dishes in the sink.
Thanks, I need to wipe the cake crumbs on the table.
Let us do this quickly.
So I made the couple breakfast.
They must work so hard.
Running a B&B ain't easy.
But if you can get your guests to do the work, it might be.
Do you think I just got played?
Well, you did mention vacuuming earlier.
I can give you a nice haircut if you want me to Kai
I know it was growing long and I haven't had a chance to cut it lately
I used to be a hairdresser so I am pretty good at doing people's hair
That would be so nice of you Aunt Sasha
Haven't you been to the barber lately?
No, I haven't found the time.
Well, you know I've been styling hair for awhile. I want to give you a cut.
Really? Well, I guess so, if you think you'll do a good job.
All of my other friends have loved my work so far.
Okay, then, let's do it!
Although I like the hair long it was time to clean it up
Kai is able to pull off either long or short hair.
I didn’t cut it that short.
You have to send me a picture of it
I’ll take one and send it to you right now.
Maybe I’ll come get a haircut when I see the picture.
Do you like working here?
Yeah it pays me okay.
What hours do you usually work?
Whatever they tell me to.
Oh, sorry I'm wasting your last few minutes.
It's okay , I like talking about my job.
I have always wondered what job Addison is doing.
I think he is an accountant.
Yes he is. I asked him this morning.
You’re lucky you caught him.
We had a chance to talk as he was waiting for his ride to work.
I am glad you have spent time with each other.
I gave money to a beggar today.
That's nice and all, but where did you get the cash to give to anybody? I thought you were broke.
I am broke, but I found some money lying on the sidewalk by the road.
Really?
Yes.
Oh wow, a twenty dollar bill.
Please help. I'm a homeless veteran.
That's so terrible! It's criminal how we treat veterans in this country.
Yes, it's very hard, especially if you were injured.
Here, take this twenty dollars I found.
Thank you! Now I can afford to eat for the next two days.
This morning I picked up 200$ by the roadside
Whoa! someone might have accidentally dropped it
sure! but I couldn't find out to whom it belong
So you kept it? could I have 100$?
No, I didn't keep it. I gave it out to a beggar
Well, that's a good deed
Did you hear about my party this weekend at Jordan’s house?
I heard it was amazing, but that you broke in.
That was a misunderstanding, I had permission to be there.
Who gave you permission?
I talked to Jordan about it months ago before he left town to go to school, but he forgot to tell his roommates about it.
Ok cool, I hope everything gets resolved.
I'm in big trouble. I did something really dumb.
I heard. Jordan told me. How could you do that?
I was desperate. I thought he wouldn't mind.
What kind of person wouldn't mind someone breaking into their house?
If it was a friend and they had a good reason, I wouldn't care.
I guess Jordan is not as open-minded as you, then.
Were you at Joran's party the other day?
Yeah, it was a lot of fun. Weren't you there too?
I was, but I don't think Jordan invited me.
How did you get in if Jordan didn't invite you?
I kind of just broke in.
You did what?
So I had a party. And now Jordan is mad at me.
Why? You didn't invite him?
I couldn't invite him. I threw it at his house.
So you feel you have a good excuse for not inviting him.
Exactly. If I had invited the guy, he would've found out that I broke into his house.
I don't know what to say.
I'm not dealing with these guys anymore since they always give me problems
maybe you should get a concealed carry license since they always try and make problems
I dont think I could carry a gun and I would definitely use it.
you dont have to use it just because you have it.
well, maybe i will get one then
You should think about it
Shoot gotta get out of here fast
woah slow down what is it
Its Tim
Tim, the guy who wants to beat you up
yea, I'm not trying to get hurt today
good call
Remy annoyed me so bad the other day, I had to give him a look of disgust.
Wow. What did he do?
Well, he really deserved it this time. He started arguing with the boss at work.
Not a good idea if he wants to keep his job.
I felt the same way.
Well hopefully he realizes it wasn't a good thing to do and won't do it again.
I can't believe he would just put his feet on the counter like that
was this guy raised around wolves or something?
seems to be, he doesn't show much respect to other people at all
I wonder what his family life was like at home?
I just gave her a nasty look!
Well she did cheat with your boyfriend.
I wanted to grab her by the hair, and just beat her.
You are better off without him and she is not worth going to jail for.
It would have been worth it!
I took my son's to the park today.
That's cool. What did you guys do at the park?
We flew drones, and played basketball.
That sounds like a fun father-son afternoon.
It was. I just wanted to spend some time with them and play some games.
Those are the kind of memories they will keep forever.
What did you end up doing today?
I ended up having to go to my Grandmas birthday party all day, and than had to do chores when I got home before I could come here.  What did you do today?
I went to the park with Patrick and Chris and we played some really fun games.
What kind of fun games? Anything that I would know of.
Probably, kick the can, and Red Roover were my favorite!
I'm jealous, next time I am skipping my grandmas party!
I took the kids to the park to spend the day and play games.
Did they enjoy hanging at the park with you?
The beginning was great and then they got bored.
Did they start complaining?
Yeah. After we ate lunch they started complaining and wanted to go home.
Did you continue playing games once you got home?
Are you ready to have some fun at the park?
Yes! Can't wait. Are you?
Me too. Can't wait to spend time with you guys and play some fun games.
How long will we be at the park?
About 4 to 5 hours.
That is more than enough time to have fun.
I'm so mad at myself. I spent a bunch of money that I shouldn't have.
Why did you spend it if you didn't have it?
I thought I was going to get a big commission from a sale but it fell through at the last minute.
Ahhh, yeah it would have been safer to delay the purchase until you knew you had it for sure.
I'm definitely going to do that next time.
Crap. I got this big credit card bill for the beamer's down payment that I can't cover.
Robin, why did you do this to yourself.
This was the best sale I ever made. I had it in the bag.
But you should wait until they sign the contract then you're good.
I signed my loan contract days before they signed theirs. I was so sure this was a done deal.
Well, next time you should wait
Oh my goodness! The sale fell through.
Ok. Sales fall through all the time. What's wrong?
I really thought this one would go through and I spent the money already.
Oh no! What did you spend the money on?
I bought my son a brand new car. He needed it for college.
I guess you have to take it back and buy a used car.
I have a guaranteed sale coming up. I think I might buy some new clothes.
Shouldn't you wait until you make the sale first?
Typically I do that, but this sale is such a sure thing I am willing to spend the money before I get it.
Hmm I would't do that, but to each their own.
Oh no, I just found out that the sale was cancelled.
Oh man I got in so much trouble yesterday
What happened?
You know Carter? He's got a thing for Diana right
Yeah, it's been going on for years
I kicked him in the balls. He kept on talking about how he slept with her and I couldn't deal with it.
Whoa dude, did you really? Did he punch you?
I can't believe some guys.
What happened?
Me and this boy got into a fight because of this girl.
Did you guys have a fist fight or something?
No, I kicked his ball with my cowboy boot and he started crying.
Oh, that's kind of mean. You should really apologize.
I just got into a fight with another guy.
Why did you guys fight?
We were both going after the same girl.
Well, who won the fight?
I did after I kicked him in the balls with my cowboy boots.
Remind me not to ever get in a fight with you.
I think I got the hang of it.
Did they show you what to do?
Yeah, they demonstrated once and then made us do it.
You are a pretty quick learner usually.
Yeah it only took a few minutes for me to do.
That's good, they will know you like to try hard.
I need to consider a lot of options so I am calling my friend.
I think it would be better if you went to meet them.
That’s what they suggested so I am going to see them tomorrow.
That is a good idea.
I hope things turn out the way it should be.
Keep your fingers crossed.
I think we should go with the retail unit on main street.
Are you sure that's the best area for our business?
I think so. It'll get the most traffic.
I think that we should meet in person to talk about it more.
I was going to suggest the same thing. I'll be there in a few minutes.
See you there.
Hey so how do you feel about joining the Marines now?
I'm happy that I did it to represent and fight for my country.
It's a great feeling and I don't think you can duplicate that anywhere.
Yes, and I have good training to get a job when I leave the military.
I am very glad you chose this route and thank you for your service.
I appreciate it and I love doing what I do.
Jen and I have been friends for a long time.
Where did you know Jan fron?
We both served our country together years ago.
You’ve come a long way.
Yes, we had each other back then.
I remember the time you left to fight.
Tracy is not answering my phones calls.  I keep calling her cell.  What else do I do?
You could try looking for her at her mom's house.
Okay maybe I'll ride by there.  I just don't understand why she is not answering.  It is like she has gone missing.
She will turn up.  Just go look at her mom's house or her boyfriends.
Okay, I will try those places.  I am so worried.
Don't worry too much.  She does this sometimes but always turns up.
This is so funny. My dad ran out of gas and called me.
Really? After all the times he got on your case about watching the tank?
Yes, that's what's so hilarious. I gave him some gas but not without some jokes.
Was he embarrassed?
Yes, and I took pictures. So funny!
My father run out of gas.
Where? do you need some help?
Yes, can you wait for me here? while I give some gas.
Sure, Take care Skylar.
Thanks, I will go now.
I just came back from taking some gas to my father.
Why couldn't he get it himself?
He had run out of gas in some neighborhood.
I hope he didn't wait too long.
He called me right away. I was able to get there in a few minutes.
I'm glad it turned out okay for him.
I nailed the job interview I told you about.
I'm so glad about that, do you think you will get the job.
Yes, I feel confident about it I hope I get it.
You will you just have to be positive, tell me more details about the interview.
Ok let's grab something to eat and I will tell you about it.
Great, let's do that then.
I think my job interview went really well, so now I just have to wait to hear back.
I'll keep my fingers crossed for you.
Thank you!! I'm optimistic, but afraid to be too optimistic.
I can understand that. Even though you feel it went well, I get that you don't want to get your hopes up too much.
Exactly. I don't want to end up disappointed if I don't get it. So I don't want to be overconfident.
That's the worst. When you convince yourself that something is going well, and then it doesn't.
What do you think of the portrait?
That's amazing. It looks exactly like Tracy!
Someone hired me to paint her portrait. I wasn't sure how it would turn out, but I think it looks just like her.
Who hired you to paint Tracy anyway?
Her boyfriend. The painting is going to be her birthday present.
That was so kind of Jan to wash my truck!
You are very fortunate to have Jan as a friend.
I know right! Jan is always helping me and making sacrifices.
You need to show more appreciation to your friend Taylor.
I always do. I will invite Jan for dinner later.
Better be a gourmet meal!
I can't help myself, especially on April Fools day.
You know your parents don't like your pranks, why do you keep doing it?
Because I want to bring a bit of humor to their life.
I don't know about that.
My  mom isn't as bad as my dad. Maybe her laughter will lighten the mood in the house.
I guess we'll see.
My parents have been annoying me so much.
I'm sorry to hear that. How so?
Well they accuse me of things I don't do.
Oh, that's terrible. Did you talk to them about it?
No, I just played tricks on them.
Oh, but that just will prove their point.
I like playing tricks on my parents.
Why?
Because it's fun.
Well then.
I wrote a story about this artist.
Why would you write a story about him?
I've admired him since I was a kid and thought this would be a little hobby of mine.
Like a fan fiction type of thing?
Not really. But I was thinking about sending it to him to look over  it.
Good luck. Maybe you'll get a book deal out of it?
I love Banksy's work so much I even joined a fan page and write fan fiction about him.
Skylar, that is weird.
No, it's not! It's not gross fan fiction. And its really fun .
Skylar! You have no idea who Banksy is or what they look like.
I know. That's a big part of way it is so fun.
I guess so. It is still weird.
I can't get this machine to work at all. I think it's broken. I'm going to have to make a new plan.
Are you sure you can't figure it out? You put so much work into it.
No, I have had enough of this. I don't think it's possible anyway.
Okay. Maybe you can ask someone for help.
Yes maybe.
I think I have to think of a new plan.
What's wrong with your current plan?
It hinges on this machine, and I can't just get it to work.
Ah okay I see
Yeah, I can't use this plan, it's over.
Hopefully your new plan will be better.
Bailey and her friend are in the basement.
I can hear them.
They are bound together with a rope.
You stopped taking your medicine?
I stopped going to my therapist and I kidnapped both girls.
I'm calling the police.
I told them to calm down, they were just upset.
The situation is not even worth to be angry about.
Yeah, that's what I told them.
They just need to be United.
Yeah I just pieced the information together, they finally understood what went on.
That's good.
We don't need to be worried about what was going on with Alex anymore.
Did you find out some of the answers?
Yes, I think I've finally pieced all the information together.
So you know what's going on now?
Yes, I think I know what's going on.
Tell me.
While I was getting ready for my big date that night, I decided to put my hair up in a french twist.
You look so good with your hair up like that.  You have such a long elegant neck.
Thanks darling.  I wanted my hair out of my face.  The dress I was wearing had a plunging back and I wanted to show off my back.
Who did you get all dressed up for?
There's this guy I met after school.  He's the quarterback for the school football team.  You might know him.
Jamison?  He's so hot.
Do you like my hair?
Yes! What do you call that style?
It's called a french twist
It looks great on you for your date tonight
I want to look amazing tonight
I can't believe Carson went to bed early, he's got an exam tomorrow.
I bet all that studying has him tired out. He was pretty lethargic today when we were having dinner.
Yeah, he needs to get his rest. I took his phone and set the alarm on it to get him up on time.
Good! I'll be sure to make him a great breakfast to give him energy for his exam.
Your legendary bacon, eggs, and toast?
Don't forget the sausages and orange juice!
I am really grateful for all your help.
No problem, I enjoy it.
I feel like I am following you blindly.
That's okay, I make good decisions.
That's good, thanks again.
My pleasure.
I heard there is going to be a big party this weekend.
Where did you hear that?
I overheard Addison talking to her friends.
Did she say there would be a DJ at the party?
All I heard was that there would be food trucks and a lot of people.
Sounds like fun, maybe we should go.
I hear you guys talking about a party. Addison told me that she went to a fun party.
Which party was it?
It was the one at the local bar in the neighbourhood.
That was the party we attended.
You attended the same party as Addison. Did you enjoy it?
We had a great time.
I overheard a lot of conversations
yeah there were a lot of crazy things said at that party
Addison had said some things about her boyfriend too that were not too great
Yes, we have heard some of it but break it down by detail
Alright I will if you have a few extra seconds
we are all ears my friend
Hey Addison, I'm going to head out to the Texas Roadhouse for dinner now.
Oh, I was leaving too and headed to the Kona Grill.
Ahh, the Kona Grill is a great place for dinner.
I love the Texas Roadhouse as well so you made a good choice.
Well, maybe next time we can go get dinner together.
Okay, sounds good and let me know your plans for next week!
Hey, it was great to see you tonight!
Same here! Where are you heading off to?
Might grab a bite to eat before turning in for the night. You?
Same! I'm going to stop at a place near my apartment.
Well have a great night! I loved seeing you.
You too! I had a great time!
I lost you after we left Addison's house.
Yeah, I ended up getting a ride with Lee and stopped to get some food.
Haha, I ended up doing the same thing. Who doesn't have food at a party?
I know, right?
I was tired when I left Addison's house so I stopped to pick up dinner.
What did Addison eat?
Addison was running out to get something to eat for himself.
Oh. Well what did you get?
I stopped and picked up a pizza.
Do you have some left for me?
I am so happy that we are friends.
I am too, I mean I know how difficult it can be to try and make friends when you are new.
It is.
I should introduce you to some other people.
That would be great, thanks. I am always looking  to meet new people.
Follow me over to that table over there.
Being alone isn't fun.
I know man.
It's ok. After being alone for a while I made some friends.
I bet you really value it more now.
I sure do.
So I was living alone and didn't have any friends here in the city at first.
How did you meet this group of friends?
Well, I joined a social club.
That's smart.
Yeah, now I have lots of friends!
I'm glad I'm one of them!
I'm so glad I've met you and the guys
Well I'm glad we met too
it got lonely here after the move
well good thing you walked into the gaming store
yea who would have thought there would be a dungeons group here in the middle of nowhere
oh there's more of us
I finally have friends.
That's so great to hear!
Yeah, I spent a lot of time by myself, but I am happy I could meet you guys
I am happy to have met you too, Lee. Want to hang out later?
Absolutely!
I finally got home.
What did you do last night?
I went out drinking!
Good for you man haha.
I'm so hungover.
I bet you are.
I was out late last night.
I guess you were partying.
I was drinking all night.
When did you come home?
I don't know, I became exhausted and went home.
You are all in one piece so I guess someone drove you home.
I need to get to bed asap. I've got to sleep.
You look terrible!
Yeah, I've been drinking all night and I can barely keep my eyes open now. I'm going straight to bed.
Make sure you drink some water before you fall asleep, or you'll get dehydrated and your hangover will be worse in the morning.
I got home so late last night.
Where were you?
First I went out with some friends to a club. Then we all headed to some party in the burbs. I am beat.
Was the party fun?
It was at first. But then I drank way too much and  I snuck out of there as soon as I was sober enough to drive.
You should have called a cab.
Your bike is back from the shop.
Awesome! Is it finally fixed?
Yes it is ready to ride now.
I'm so glad they got it done, I really missed riding my bike.
It almost looks like it is brand new they did a really good job.
Yes, I trust them very much and always make sure my bike is fixed quickly.
Thanks for picking up my bike, were they able to repair it?
Yep, they said it was fixed and is like brand new now.
Perfect, I'm so glad they stand by their warranty.
Yes you really got lucky there, but most new items have some kind of warranty
And they made it easy, dropped it off, fixed in one day, picked it up, done deal
Hmm I might consider getting my next bike from them then.
I got my bike back today
Did Lee help you?
Yeah it was repaired in the shop and he went to pick it up
Is it working now?
Yes, all it needed was a tightening
Now you can go for a ride again!
I don't know what I would have done if I didn't get this new job!
You were lucky because it's not easy finding a job right now.
My rent was due two days ago so without this job I would have been looking for a place to live too.
Maybe you should get a roommate to help pay the rent?
I think I can manage now with this job, but it's something to think about.
Definitely! Getting a roommate was the best decision I ever made!
I finally found a new job
That's great news, how will you celebrate?
First I have to pay my rent that is overdue
That's a good idea
After my bills are paid maybe we can go out to eat
That would be fun, it's been awhile since we did that
I'm going to go check on the pizza, it smells delicious!
Of course it will be delicious, anything you make is so good
Aw thank you, this looks ready, I'm gonna go ahead and take it out of the oven now
Perfect timing, by the time it's cool enough to be cut we can start the movie
Thanks for coming over tonight, I love our pizza/movie nights!
I just come for the delicious pizza! HAHA Just kidding, you know I love you
So I had a nice time this weekend by myself.
Oh yeah? What did you do?
I made pizza!
Sounds great, did it take a long time?
About half an hour, I took it out when it was ready and it was nice and crispy.
Sounds delicious, now I want some pizza!
Robin and I were crammed into a car on the ride and it was ridiculously crowded.
Why didn't you each get your own car on the ride?
I don't know they put us in the same car and poor Robin didn't even have anywhere for her arm so I put it on my leg.
That sounds kind of weird. Did she want you to do that?
I don't know, but she didn't complain.
Sometimes you act weird.
Robin was sitting next to me on the plane. When she fell asleep, she was really sitting awkward.
It's hard to get comfortable on those plane seats.
I agree. Anyway, she kept moving her arm but couldn't find a place to put it, so I put her hand on my leg, which helped her arm.
Was she okay with that? She didn't mind?
I don't think so. I felt weird but she was struggling.
I put Robin's hand on my leg at the theatre.
Why did you do that?
There was no arm rest between the seats we had.
Don't you think that's still too strong of a move?
Yeah it was. But at least she seemed to like it.
I'm guessing you guys are going to be going to movies more often?
She did really well today.
I know, but why didn't you stand up, it was your idea.
Well, she's been having a hard time working, getting along with everyone, so I let her have it
That was too nice of you.
I had my turn yesterday, so I sat quietly at the back of the room.
You are so nice to give them the stage.
Of course, that's the way to do it.
I admire your principles.
That is how my parents taught me.
You are a good person.
It's not our time yet to shine.
Yes, Just wait for now Sasha.
Will do, we will go back to backseat to our co-worker for now.
Sure, I will just call you when it's your time.
Thank you, I will wait for you.
You are welcome Sasha.
I feel like my boss likes my co-worker better than me.
Well, it's true that you've been shirking your duties lately, letting your co-worker pick up the slack.
I just feel like it hasn't been my time to shine, so I've been taking a backseat.
Well, that's a convenient excuse. You need to show up ready to shine every day at work.
My efforts don't really get recognized by my boss.
Well, if your boss thinks you're taking a backseat, you could be fired.
I just sat back and let my co-workers do the talking.
You don't have to talk all the time.
I learned so much more when I just listen.
People need to be better listeners.
I have seen that at the office.  Some people just like to talk.
They usually don't say anything.
It's crazy that someone steals your wallet and doesn't want to give it back.
Maybe she think she's being slick.
Not slick at all as I have great evidence that shows she has it.
Is it camera evidence?
I have witnesses and camera evidence.
She is in trouble.
My kids really got on my nerves today.
Oh no. I hope you didn't hit them.
I didn't. I just gave them a stern talk.
That's good. Just don't yell at them.
I think sometimes I can come across as hostile, but my methods make sure people don't mess around.
Yeah man, it's the truth!
I basically gave them one look and they knew what they had done.
You've done that to me before and sometimes it's frightening.
Works a treat then.
You scary girl, Remy.
I can't believe you left the party so early!
We thought you left already too so we didn't look for you.
But we were having so much fun dancing!
Yeah but I thought everyone was tired from last night. You can't expect us to give us a look in the eyes and know what's going on.
It's okay, there will be other parties, but promise not to leave without me next time.
Okay, we will be sure not to leave without you.
I am really disappointed in my children.
What did they do to make you feel that way?
You know my husband's mother passed away last spring, right?
Yes, I recall you having to travel to get her remains after the cremation.
Right. Well, the urn was kept on top of the mantle and the kids were playing around and knocked it down, shattering the urn and spilling the ashes. They vacuumed them up.
Oh my goodness. What are you going to tell your husband?
So we were just walking along and all of a sudden I see this huge snake in the pond!
Oh that's cool, was it like an anaconda or something?
I'm not sure, either way I threw a rock to try and distract it. It splashed the snake and it came back for us.
Oh no, I am terrified of snakes. How did you get away?
Well I used a stick to try and put him off and eventually he left me alone.
Good thing you're still here.
We were camping and saw a snake in the water.
What kind of snake was it?
I have no idea, it was coming at me, so I picked up a rock and threw it in the water at it.
You should have left it alone, if it was not bothering you.
I saw a snake and tried to scare it away.
Why it is more afraid of you than you are of it.
I just hate snakes ok?
Just as long as you don't hurt it.
It landed like 5 feet from the snake I didn't hurt it.
I actually happen to like snakes so you better not.
I've been working with a tutor.
How do you like her?
She's great. I was falling really far behind, but I'm catching up with her help.
How often do you meet with her?
Usually once a week, but twice a week when we have a test coming up.
I'm glad it's working. I know you were pretty stressed.
You know, some people like me just need a bit of extra assistance every now and then.
Yeah, how do you get that? For me personally it helps to have more books.
Hell no, I need a tutor to take care of me every now and then
Is it always going to be that way?
I feel like a tutor gives me more motivation as he directs me in the right way.
Well judging by your recent grades it seems to be working, keep up the good work.
I had to stop at school on the way here, I'm sorry to be late.
No problem but why did you go to school? Are the kids okay?
Yeah, but Casey forgot his lunch so I brought him a sandwich since he has no money for the cafeteria.
Oh thank goodness you realized it. He'd have been starving all afternoon.
Yes, and he doesn't do well in class when he's hungry so I hope the principal gave it to him.
I'm sure she will. You are such a good mom.
That girl is always forgetting to take her lunch.
Did you end up taking it to her again.
I did, I didn't want her to starve at school.
Maybe you should let her do without one day, to learn she has to take it.
I thought about that, but with her diabetes she has to eat something.
The school would have provided her a lunch.
Sorry I'm late, I had to drop off Casey's lunch at the school to keep him from starving to death.
He's still forgetting his lunch this far into the school year?
Yes, he just cannot seem to get organized.
Maybe you guys could try to get everything ready the night before.
We have tried that, but he forgets everything in the morning!
Make a list at the door of things to remember so he sees it before leaving the house.
I just got elected to be the President of the club.
Wow, that's amazing. What is your role?
I provide financial support to the members.
Sounds like an important role.
Yes it is.
Glad to hear your success.
I had everything prepared for all members of the club before going in.
Well besides minutes, what documents did you need?
I prepared a financial report for everyone.
People like to know where the money is going so that was probably the most important report.
They had been asking for it for several weeks so I hope they are satisfied.
The bottom line should satisfy them all.
Did you know that I'm President of the club?
I didn't know that. What responsibilities do you have?
There are a few, but I mostly provide financial support to the members.
That's an important role.
It is. I take my job seriously.
I'm proud that you have such a good job.
Okay, next up on the agenda, grants to help club members pay for groceries during the pandemic.
Mr. President, I have the list of members who've been laid off right here.
I see there's only eight people now that Jack agreed to hire Sal and Marie.
Yes, our budget can easily cover food assistance for eight people.
Okay, I'll sign the checks after the meeting.
And I'll drive to everyone's house to pass them out tomorrow morning.
I had been wanting to see that new show for months and Addison finally got me on the schedule to view it.
That was really nice of her to do that for you.
I know! I am so thrilled that she was able to do that and I can't wait to go see the show.
When are you supposed to go?
This weekend and I couldn't be more excited!
Well have a great time!
Addison scheduled me to attend the show
Oh really, so you'll finally get to the show
Yeah you know that I've been talking about wanting to see it for a long time
Okay, it's quite good. maybe I could join you for the show
I love playing with kids.
There is Kai's son. He is so cute.
He is not in a good mood. He was crying so I had to put him down.
I think he is not feeling good.
I just left him alone for a while.
Kai's picking him up soon.
My date with Austin was interesting, I guess overall it went well
Hmm sounds like there was already trouble in paradise
I wish I had known he had never kissed a girl before I went in for that kiss!
Was it not a good kiss?
He bit my lip!
Well practice makes perfect!
Ow, my lip is still hurting today.
Is that where Austin bit you? How on earth did he manage that?
He literally went in for the kiss and bit me instead!
Sounds like he's pretty inexperienced.
He never kissed a girl before me apparently.
Did he even kiss you in the end?
This is the last time I'm seeing Austin!
Why are you bleeding?
He bit my lip.
Let me get you a tissue.
Thanks, apparently he had never kissed a girl before. No surprise there I guess!
It goes to show!
My sister is going to be so happy when she gets home from school!
Why will she be happy? Are you moving out?
No smart guy... I found a doll that she lost last month. She's been whining about it ever since.
Oh that's great! Wow, she will be happy. Where did you find it?
It was under the sofa in the living room. I think the cat must have dragged it under there.
Stupid cat! Well at least you found it.
I found a bunch of things that were lost and I am loving it!
Cool, what you found?
I found the doll my sister lost a few months ago, she was driving nuts about it.
And what you going to do with it now?
I will give it to her after making her do some tasks for me.
You are mean!
I am so excited!
You remember that doll your sister lost?
Yes, the one that we were sure to be missing?
Yes, I've looked for a replacement for weeks and finally found an exact copy.
Will she believe it's the same doll?
That's the big question.  I hate to fool her, but she'll be so happy if she thinks I found her doll.
I was just brushing my teeth the other day and noticed something odd in the cabinet.
Let me guess, your sister's doll? You've been searching for weeks.
Yes! Who thought it would be somewhere so obvious!
Glad you found it in the end!
It's good to expect the unexpected.
I agree but why are you saying that?
I just finished making some soup for dinner then a bunch of friends popped up without notice. So of course I had to make more soup for my buds.
Right on bro. That was nice of you to feed your buddies.
It's a good thing I like cooking otherwise I would have told everyone to bugger off!
How the hell did you make so much soup?
It's really easy and felt bad that they were all starving. When they all showed up at once I was very annoyed though
Did you know they were coming?
Nope, they showed up completely unannounced.
Well that’s not fair.
I had just finished making dinner and then a couple friends were at the door.
Oh no! Did you ask them to leave?
No I invited them in and made a couple more bowls of soup.
That was nice, what type of soup was it?
It was tomato and basil soup.
That sounds good, let me know next time you make it so I can drop by.
Clearly my friends must think I'm some sort of catering service.
They were by the neighbourhood and stopped by unannounced?
Quite literally, their excuse was that they wanted to try my soup I'd been bragging about.
Serves you right for bragging in my opinion.
My god that party was so dull.
Why didn’t you like the party?
Honestly, it was lame. It just seemed like more of a frat party than my kind of scene.
I've heard Lee goes pretty nuts at those parties, suppose I should have warned you before hand.
It's cool, at least now I know to never go back.
I hope you don’t think that about my parties.
I don't think Austin likes me anymore
what did you do to upset him?
I called him stupid, but I was just kidding around.
I guess Austin doesn't have a very good sense of humour
Maybe, but sometimes I take a joke too far
Well, I guess your new enemy is one less person you have to buy a Christmas present for.
I just can't stand Austin anymore!
Aren't you friends with him?
We were, but he keeps making fun of me for calling him stupid and telling him he's overreacting.
Serves you right surely?
That is a terrible way to joke. It hurts me.
You're both being immature.
Did you see that woman who came in?
She was beautiful.  You should go over and talk to her next time.
She's beautiful, she won't even look at me.
She's just a person like anybody else.
More like a goddess you mean.
Now as I look at you, maybe you're right.
A really pretty lady started working at my job today.
Did you have a chance to meet her?
No. I was intimidated and avoided her.
Come on Ash. Is she that pretty?
She could be a movie star. I would like to get to know her. I have to overcome my fear.
I guess you'll just have to go for it.
Oh, wow. Look who just walked in.
Wow. She's hot.
Yeah, I'm going to go talk to her.
Uh, you haven't moved.
Yeah, I'm going to go talk to her any minute, now.
OK, smooth guy.
I just want to put my feet up and relax.
What about having tea?
Actually that is a great idea, I will go make some chamomile. Do you want some?
Sure, that sounds great.
Okay, here you go. I also added some sugar.
Thanks, that is just how I like it.
I've been having a little trouble sleeping lately, I think I need something to help me relax.
We can make some chamomile tea, my mom and granny always used to make that for me if I was having trouble getting to sleep.
Ok, I've never tried that.  Can you make it?
Sure.  I will make it, and it should only take a minute.  I hope this helps you.
Wow...This doesn't taste like I thought it would.  It's not very good.  But I already feel a little sleepy.
That's great, we'll have to get you a supply of chamomile to keep at your house, too.
Camomile is the only way that I'm able to go to sleep.
I heard that helps a lot of people because it's warm.
I think the warm just soothes you and relaxes your muscles.
That makes all the sense in the world.
That's why I have so many bags of Camomile.
Is chamomile your favourite?
What a long day!
You've been working a lot of hours lately.
This project has been really tough, but right now I just want to relax. I'll boil some water and we can have some chamomile tea
Thank you, that stuff makes me so chilled out.
That sounds really soothing.
I'll let you know when it's ready.
I had asked Alex to send me the pdf for the school project but he hasn't done it yet.
Is he on your team?
He's one of the four people on the team. I hate team projects, someone always flakes.
That's not fair.
Other members have to step up and make up for their work.
Give Alex a chance.
Wow, it was so nice out today so I had to go for a hike.
Yeah, it was sunny all day and cool at the same time.
You don't get a lot of chances to get out into the wild.
I'm glad you took advantage of it today.
I saw so many birds and turtles on the hike.
Seeing the animals is the best part of hiking.
How come you're not an outdoorsy person?
I don't know. I just never liked being outside. I prefer staying in an air conditioned house reading a book or something.
Yeah, yeah...I went on a hike yesterday with Bill. It was such a beautiful day outside.
How long of a hike did you go on?
About an hour into the trail and an hour out. Nothing too long. It was getting a little too hot after a while even for me.
Yeah, it's gonna be hot all week. I sure do love my air conditioner.
There's just so much going on with the divorce, you know.
Have you heard of Aubrey? She's the best attorney in town.
Yes, she will actually be handling the case. Hopefully there will be a fair pay out for all the stuff he's done to me!
I'm sure justice will be served, she knows what she's doing. Believe me.
Thanks for believing.
No problem, Casey.
She just popped out the blue on my friend's phone.
Not sure why she would, but I think she likes him. She wouldn't shut up about this boy the other day so it must be him.
Sasha is a good girl. He might like her.
Yeah, will be interesting to see what will happen.
The sad part of having purple hair? My hair dye is staining all my hats.
But I thought you loved your hats?
Yeah, but it's one or the other. I can't be staining my new Gucci bucket hat.
I hear you bro, I would do the same in your shoes.
Or maybe I could start a new style? Stained hats.
That's a good idea for real.
I finally don't need to wear hats when I go outside.
Is your hair looking better now?
Yeah, I realized the dye still stains my hats.
I didn't know that was a problem.
Yeah, I love my hats but at least I get to show off my new hair!
Great! I like seeing your dyed hair.
All of my hats are stained blue from my hair dye.
I would be mad if I were you, wasn't that stuff supposed to be non staining?
I thought so, at least that is what the bottle of dye said.
Can you get the stains out?
Maybe, I will have to soak them for a while in something.
I can bring over a big tub so you don't have to use your bathtub and get it stained too.
I had to stop wearing my basketball caps.
Why? Do they bother you?
No! I coloured my hair and now when I wear a hat, the dye comes off onto the brim.
Oh wow. Well how long till the dye comes off your hair?
In about 6 weeks, I think.
You can go back to wearing hats then, at least.
My dye ruined all of my hats.
Oh no. I loved your hats.
I can't even wear hats anymore.
Darn it. You looked so good in them.
I don't know what I'm going to do now that I'm out of the paint I need for my project.
Did you already check at your favourite art store downtown?
Yes, but they were all sold out.
Do you need to finish the project soon?
I would like to have it done tomorrow at the latest.
Let's go check at the art store in the mall and see if they carry it.
I really want to make a painting for my husband.
You should do that, I know he will love it!
Oh darn, my usual store ran out of paint. Would you mind if I used your paint?
Oh totally, I will run to my house and pick it up for you.
Thank you so much Susie!
Not a problem, I am happy to do it.
Dill's is out of the paint that I need.
I may have some, what colours do you needs.
Orange and blue for the picture.
Let me go check real quick. I got them, here you go.
Thanks for letting me borrow them, so I can finish the project.
I am going to have to drive an hour for paint.
That store doesn't carry it?
No, they are all out.
Can't you just wait?
No, I really want to paint my picture.
Well have a nice drive.
My art gallery is opening in less than a week and I am one painting short for the show. I already know the picture I want to paint but I don't have enough of the paint colours I need to use to paint the picture.
Okay, but that's an easy fix. Just go to your favourite craft store and pick some up.
I was just there yesterday and they were all out of the paint that I need.
Can't you just buy a different paint or mix some of the paint you already have to make the colours you will need?
No, I already thought of that and went through all of the paint I do have. Unfortunately I am also out of a few base colours which makes mixing paints not an option.
What about ordering the paint online and pay the extra fee for next day delivery? That way you can get the paint you need, you don't have to leave your house, and they should arrive in time to give you ample time to finish the painting. That should work.
I don't want to brag, but she said it was the best date she ever had.
It should be for all the money you spent.
She's worth it, I mean flowers and chocolates are nice, but the limo put it over the top!
How are you going to top that though?
I don't need to top it, she was already talking about how she would tell all of her friends.
Thanks for making it harder for the rest of us!
I went all out for this date.
Really what did you do?
Got a limo, flowers, and chocolates.
How did your girl like them?
She was blown away.
I bet she was.
I was glad that I performed well in the race.
Yeah, I heard you did awesome!
Yeah, top three!
That's so great! Were there a lot of people in the race?
There definitely were. It was nice to finish in the top few.
I'm glad that you managed.
Let's go hunting he said!
How on earth did he shoot you in the chest?
It was just a pellet, but still. He saw a deer and thought he could get the shot off, turns out that deer was me...
Can I see the scar?
Absolutely not.
Darn it.
My chest is still in immense pain.
You're still in the hospital?
Yeah, it's going to take a while to recover since the hunting trip.
What exactly happened?
I went hunting with Carson for the time and he accidentally shot me in the chest.
Carson should never use a gun again.
Hey dude, what's up? Do you need some money?
What? Uh no, not really. Wait, how'd you get all that money?
Well, I probably shouldn't say, but I found a way into the Bank.
Really? You know that's stealing?
I needed money.
So do a lot of people.
I took my needs a little far.
What did you do this time?
I broke into a bank by cutting a hole in the wall.
Now you can apply for a cell with the penitentiary prison.
I got a huge score today.
Score, what do you mean, did you win something?
I broke into a bank, I really needed the money.
How did you break into a bank?
I cut a hole right into the wall.
I don't think we should be talking about this.
Bailey showed up with Larissa, what a lovely surprise.
Were you not a bit jealous?
Not in the slightest, I know that Bailey is a good friend and nothing would ever be going on between those two.
Well it's always nice to have that level of trust with someone.
Plus it's a bonus to see my partner during a shift!
It sure is.
That was so nice of Bailey to bring my girlfriend to the bar to see me.
It really was. And your girlfriend is so pretty!
I know. I love her so much. And Bailey knew I haven't had a chance to see my girlfriend in like a week.
Bailey is a really good friend to you.
She is. It was such a nice surprise. I should do something nice for her.
You could give her a few drink vouchers the next time she comes in.
Bailey brought my girlfriend to see me at the bar.
Did you pour them drinks?
Of course, I know my girlfriend loves tequila so I gave her one too many!  I made Bailey a vodka drink with strawberries.
That sounds amazing.  You are such a great bartender.
I was happy to see them.
Did you guys hang out after you got off?
Bailey took my girlfriend out to see me the other night.
That was really nice of her. Why did she do it?
I was stuck at work at the bar.
Those shifts are really long, I'm glad you got to see your girlfriend.
Me too, it was really nice to see her during a long shift.
Make sure to thank Bailey for the ride!
I've always been a voracious reader, but did I ever tell you about why?
I just assumed you were born interested in books.
Not at all. I used to read them every night before bed to Bailey, this is why he's become a bookworm now.
That's sweet.
I think that's the reason why I feel so passionate about reading.
It is so funny how things work out sometimes.
How do you mean?
Well, instead of my dad being the one who reads the most, it's the other way round.
That's really odd.
Right, he ended up getting me interested in reading when I never had been before.
That's a nice bonus, isn't it? Everyone can learn to love to read.
You have any books I can borrow? I'm out of stuff to read.
I can look. Every time I see you, you have a book in your face.
My mom, Bailey, she read to me every night. Then we started reading together, I love reading.
What kind of books do you read?
I love horror and mystery the best. I'll read anything though.
Maybe you should get a library card. You would have a steady supply of books at your fingertips.
Ever since Bailey was a baby, I read him a story every night.
Even when he was a baby? Did it put him to sleep?
Yes, after awhile. But, it was a bonding thing then.
Does he like to read now that he's older?
He's a book nut...just like me. The years of reading to him made him love them.
You're a good dad, Quinn. Bailey's a lucky boy!
My son is an avid reader. He can spend the whole day at the library 24/7.
That Is a great source of knowledge. When did he acquire his interest in books?
Since he was little. Probably because I read to him books every night to put him to sleep, four years.
He must be very smart like you. Maybe I should start reading for my baby too.
Yes that really helps a lot with child development.
Thanks for the tip. I hope he grows up interested in books, too.
I had so much trouble in the car.
Let's just buy a new one.
Okay, what should I buy?
An electric car.
Not many points of failure or moving parts.
Yes, that's correct.
It seemed that every month something went wrong with the car.
Did you have a good repair technician?
The technicians did a good job, but the cost of the repairs added to high amounts.
How did you solve the problem with the car?
I bought a new one.
I'm happy for you. You should have better luck with your new car.
I am just so sick of my car breaking down, I really needed a new one
I'm glad you finally got one! It's so nice
The air conditioning even works!
That is a game changer, especially with summer coming up.
I know! No more sweaty car rides
You are living the high life.
I can't believe I got tackled that hard.
It was a brutal game.
Did you see the size of the quarterback?
Yeah but stretching should help a lot.
I can already feel it helping and think I'll start coming to more yoga classes.
Yoga is great for so many things.
I've been having pain in my back for a long time now.  It just doesn't go away no matter what I do.
That's annoying.  I experience chronic back pain too.  I almost got addicted on painkillers last time I saw a doctor.
I am trying not to take too many strong drugs.  I went to yoga the other day and did a lot of stretching and that helped with the pain.
You should keep doing that then.
That's what I am thinking.  I am going to yoga once every two weeks now.  Maybe I should go every week.
I might join you.
Yoga definitely helps with the pain that I have in my back.
I knew it would help you, you just had to try it first.
I think I want to actually sign up for the class for the rest of the year.
That is great! I will go with you to all the classes I can if that makes it better.
Definitely, it is good to have someone for support when you're trying to improve yourself.
No problem, anything for a good friend.
He just doesn't do anything he is supposed to do.
Is that why you called him to your office?
I just want him to know that he works in a team, not by himself.
He doesn't seem like a team player.
I know, that's part of the problem.
I'm going to get a huge bill from the hotel when I check out tomorrow.
Oh how come? Did you raid the mini bar?
Well that too. But I invited all of Kai's friends over last night and they trashed the place. I mean bad.
Oh you must be angry! You should make them pay for it.
Nah I don't care, I'll take care of it. My dad is rich.
Wow, you're lucky to have such a rich dad.
Man last night was wild!
Did you get to the hotel room alright?
Yeah, not just that, me and Kai's friends ended up thrashing up the whole room.
You idiots, too much alcohol again let me guess?
Yeah, speaking of.. Do you have a glass of water?
Here, get some rest now.
Last night was, well, interesting.
Run me through it.
So I got quite close to Kai's pals and they came over to my hotel room. They ended up smashing up the place.
You must be mad surely!
I actually found the whole thing pretty damn funny, the expenses will get put on my company card anyway.
You're literally living life on the edge.
I think I need to increase my pace if I want to get a raise this year
I'm sure you will at the rate that you're working
I think I'm going to put some overtime hours in as well if I can
Doesn't hurt to make some extra money I guess
I made sure my work looks good instead of subpar
You are trying to perfect your craft?
Yeah I want a raise, I'm tired of a poor salary
You need to up your game
I'm tediously working on my writing
You will get that raise in no time
I've been putting in more hours lately, sorry we haven't been able to hang out?
I know, I am kind of annoyed about that, but that's fine. Work busy?
Not particularly, but I am trying to pick up more assignments so that I can get a raise.
Oh, good for you trying to burn the midnight oil! Have you considered a higher paying job? Might be easier.
I did but I kind of like it here and my co-workers.
That's cool. Well, I hope we can hang out soon!
I wanted to increase the quality of my product, so I started hand carving my figurines.
That is a good idea.  The old company that you went through didn't have much quality to their figurines.
Yes, these hand-carved ones should be better to my customers.
I think so too.  They sure do look a lot better.
I am really terrible at sports.
Then you must be good at other things.
Yes, I do cheer-leading, everyone at school knows and adores me.
Must be nice being you.
It is. The boys always pick me for their team.
Your lack of sports knowledge doesn't seem to stop them
I can't stand playing sports and they always pick me first for the team.
It is because they all want to show off to you.
I just want to cheer and don't even like sports.
You are nice and good looking, they like you.
I am ugly, they only like me because of my sister.
No, the guys all like how you are and that is why you are popular. Who knows that girl!
It doesn't matter how hard I try, I am an absolute klutz on the field.
Sports just isn't your thing. There's nothing wrong with that.
I just don't like not being good at something. Stuff usually comes so easily to me.
Well, the boys choose you first whenever they're picking teams. So what does it matter if you're good or not?
That's a good point. I mean, they seem to think I'm good, apparently. Right?
Almost. They think you're funny, which isn't quite the same thing.
Hah, I love doing sports in PE.
Why? I thought you were terrible at sports.
I am. But I just love being fought over by the guys. They all crowd over me like needy puppies, it's so cute!
Hah, but what about when the time comes to play?
Oh, it's not a big deal. I just pretend to get hurt and then some big burly guy comes over and carries me off the field.
Good strategy, as long as it's not the teacher.
I watched the best movie the other day.
What was it?
Easy Rider, now I want a motorcycle.
That was a good movie.
Yeah it was so cool.
Hope you can get the motorcycle you want.
I love this movie and how cool his bike is.
It is cool, makes me want to ride.
I really want to get a motorcycle now
Why don't you?
I think I am going to just need to learn how to ride a bike.
It isn't that hard I can teach you how to.
I just watched the movie Easy Rider.
Did you enjoy watching the movie?
Yes I have always wanted a motorcycle since watching the movie.
You should get yourself one, careful though, I hear it's dangerous.
Damn it, this is bad
What's going on
I've been trying to find a way to pay for this cruise all morning, but can't put the funds together.
Not working out?
No, nothing I do will be enough
I'm sorry, anything I can do to help?
I don't think I can go on the cruise this summer.
Oh no!  Why is that?
I crunched the numbers and I just don't have the money.
Can you get a part time job?
I'm already working two jobs and have that wedding coming up in March.
Oh I forgot about that.  We will miss you on the cruise!
I think I might have to work some extra hours to be able to take the cruise
I know a friend that is hiring for part time  servers at  his restaurant
That would be amazing if he could get me a job
Just let me call him up tomorrow. I can see if I can get you an interview
I now need a new car.
Didn't you just buy one?
Yes I did, but I ran into an accident.
Don't tell me you wrecked it all up.
That is what exactly happened, the old one got completely written off. That is why I need a new one.
Better be careful.
I got into a bad accident, and now I need to get a new car.
Were you hurt in the accident, or was it just the car?
Thankfully it was just the car, but it was completely totalled.
That's got to be hard. Do you have a loaner car?
No, so we're just operating with one car right now.
I hope you find a new car soon.
I got really lucky I wasn't injured in the car accident.
The car looked like a crushed tin can.
Do you like this sedan?
I like the car but not the colour.
I think I will get this one but in silver.
I think silver works the best for the climate.
I think I might get a new car from the new car place in town
I heard they were cheap and had some great deals there
Let's head over there and check them out real quick, my old one is completely useless after that accident.
Okay, let me put my shoes on and I will meet you outside
Just hurry up
I went to Disneyland last week.
Who did you go with?
I went with my friends.
Did you ride any fun rides?
We went on a lot of rides, but I had a scary time on the roller coaster.
I don't blame you for that. Those rides are scary!.
I went with my friends to Disneyland.  They wanted to get on a roller coaster,  I was so afraid.
Did you enjoy it?
Not at all.  I threw up when I got off.
That sounds horrible.
I went to the bathroom and changed, I had brought a change of clothes just incase.
That's a smart thing to do.
Hi there, how are you doing? I had an interesting day at work today.
My day's been fine. What was so interesting at work?
We had a corporate meeting. One of my colleagues started belittling my input as we discussed the employee retention situation.
In an important meeting like that, everyone's point of view should matter.
That's exactly what I told my colleague. I told that everyone is entitled to their own opinion, including myself.
That was an excellent thing to say! You are so intelligent.
I feel like my teacher is upset with me.
Well, you did launch into a long, angry speech about how wrong she was, so of course she's upset with you.
I couldn't stop the words from rolling off of my tongue though. I was just so upset that she wasn't listening to my point of view.
You need to learn how to control yourself more.
I just wanted to get my point of view through to her.
You don't need to shout to do that, though.
I had a hard time explaining myself earlier, but I eventually managed to get the right words off the tip of my tongue.
I hate that feeling, when you know what you want to say but you can't find the right words to say it.
I do too. But I had to explain my point of view to everybody and couldn't just give up on it.
I've always admired your tenacity with these things.
My team needs more practice before finals.
You don't think they are ready to compete?
Not really, and I don't want them to be disappointed if we lose.
Well, we all have to learn failure in order to work harder.
That's true I guess.
How do I communicate this to my team without offending or demoralising them?
What is it Lee?
I've decided we need more time to practice. So no league games this week. We're getting better, But I just don't think we're ready to face competition yet.
Haven't they been training hard for months?
Take it from me. Any amount of training is preferable to defeat.
Okay, Lee. You know best.
I really hate that they are going through that divorce.
Yea, it is never easy. That is a tough situation.
Yea, I just wanted to make sure that the terms are fair.
Awesome! I'm sure that both sides were very pleased with that.
Yes, they are. It worked out really well for them.
I'm glad that worked out. I'm happy you could provide a little bit of a silver lining.
This was one of the nastiest divorces I have ever worked on.
How are you able to finally settle it?
The real trouble with the finances in the property.
Money is always the number one issue in these problems.
That's why prenups are so important these days.
If I ever get rich I'm getting one.
It's always hard dealing with two people getting divorced.
That's why they hire you, Taylor. You're the best arbitrator in the business.
Yeah. This last case was particularly messy, but we finally reached an agreement that both sides were happy with.
You should be proud of yourself for helping them move on amicably.
Yeah, that's a good way of looking at it.
I got a bike for Christmas!
That is awesome! Now we can go exploring.
Where should we go first?
I was thinking we can go ride up to that old house on the hill.
You mean the house that people say is haunted by the ghost of that mean old man?
Yes, that's the one! Maybe we will find his hidden money!
I just knew that I was going to get that bike for Christmas.
Did they have the bike under the tree for you?
No, they waited till all the kids opened the presents and then told me they had something outside for me.
Your mom told me that they wanted to keep it as a surprise.
What do you mean mom told you?
I was the one that helped pick out the bike, since I know what you like.
I am so happy I got a bike for my gift!
Oh wow, I'm so jealous, I've been asking for a bike all year.
What did you get?
I got a Switch and some games to go with it.
Wow, that's awesome. We should play some games next weekend. I'll ride my bike over.
Sounds like fun, let's do it.
I got a cool new bike.
Awesome! What colour is it?
It's dark blue like my old one.
What will you do with the old one?
We donate them to the less fortunate in the summer.
That's pretty cool.
I could have gone camping with the others you know
So why didn't you go?
I stayed to play video games with my friends
Seems you enjoy video games more than camping
I would have loved to go camping with everyone, but I just got this new video game and love it.
I can't believe you chose a video game over your friends.
We had a big online tournament I promised my other friends I would be in.
Sometimes you have to get away from the video games and enjoy nature. Video games aren't good for you.
I don't see why I can't play video games a little bit. It's fun and keeps me busy.
I understand that but you missed an amazing weekend with your friends in the woods!
It's been a tough week for me. I just wasn't in the mood to go camping this weekend.
But why? We could have so much fun together.
There's a lot of hassle involved in packing and getting ready and not to mention the time it takes to actually get there.
Fishing, campfires, hiking, birdwatching. There are so many fun activities you guys could do together.
Sorry but I just need some time to rewind. I will stay at home and play some video games on my Xbox.
You'll definitely regret it eventually, buddy.
I could have gone camping with the others today, but I didn't.
What did you decide to do instead?
I played video games with my friends.
I would have chosen to play video games too. Sike.
I provided a photograph of Kendall for the news to share.
What happened to Kendall?
He had gone hunting but has been gone for a week now.
That is bad news.
They have been searching for him and they needed that photograph. They have been searching for him and they needed that photograph.
I hope he gets rescued.
Kendall was my best friend and we hung out almost everyday so here is a really recent picture of him.
How recent is this photo? Is it close to what he looks like today?
We took this photo in one of those photo booths in the mall a few days before he went missing on his hiking trip a week ago.
Thank you, that's really helpful to all of us on the search and rescue team. Do we have your permission to use this photo to give to the news stations.
Absolutely, you can share it with who ever you want if it will help find him and bring him home!
Great, after we make copies for the rest of the people on our team, we will give the new crews a copy and return the original to you.
I knew Kendall would want to go, there is a lot to do on this trip
She will be so excited to go with you and learn a lot on this excursion
Totally. I am super excited and stuff too. It's going to be her first time doing this type of trip.
Will she be alright? I heard there can be a few tough parts in the trail
I'm sure she'll get used to it once she's there
Just take care of her, alright.
Okay, raise your hand if you want to go.
But Skylar's not here to vote.
I know she wants to go, so I'll include her in the count.
Okay, good. I'm raising my hand too.
All right. Help me count.
That's 8 who want to go plus Skylar.
I had to drive Tracy to the airport this morning. The traffic was crazy there.
Why did you take her?
She had to go out of town to see her folks and didn't want to take a taxi.
That's really nice of you to do; that airport is a tough drive.
I know but I was actually going to be near it anyway and wanted to help.
You're a great friend. I hope she brings you back a souvenir.
Sorry I was late. Had to take Tracy to the airport.
Where's she going?
She had to go out of town to her Grandmother's house.
Oh, that's cool. She'll get to see her for Christmas.
Exactly. And then she will celebrate with her parents when she gets back.
Sounds good.
I think I am quite sick.
You should go to the hospital or talk to a pharmacist at least.
Never mind, it's nothing. I will be okay after I rest.
Are you sure about this? you don't seem to be taking this serious.
It's nothing really.
I hope so.
People tell me I have a dark sense of humour because I made fun of my own illness.
I think it's inappropriate to joke about sickness.
But if I don't laugh, I might cry, so it's better for me to find the humour in things.
I guess I can understand that. Either way, I hope you get better soon.
I had an amazing evening with Carson last night.
Did you guys have a date night?
Yes, I planned the whole romantic evening. I even ended the night by caressing his cheek after dinner.
Wow! You two are the cutest.
I planned a romantic evening with Carson, I'm so in love with him.
Is that why you made dinner?
Yeah, he came home and I made him a three course meal.
Did you guys do anything afterwards?
We watched a movie afterwards and when the time was right, I caressed his cheek.
That's cute.
I went to my friend Jan's house. She needed to shower before we studied so I raided the pantry for food, I was hungry.
Oh wow. Do you think she'll care that you took food?
Oh no. We always eat food at each other's house.
Now I'm hungry. What did you eat?
I grabbed some crackers and bread. They were good, I shared when she got out of the shower.
It was probably good to have some food to fuel you for the studying!
I was visiting Jan's house and she went to take a shower before studying so I explored her house.
What did you find?
I got hungry so I found her pantry.
What did you eat?
I made myself a sandwich.
I genuinely think I might be a kleptomaniac.
Oh god this doesn't sound good, what did you do now?
I found some nutty bars whilst Jan was in the shower, ate all of them and never told her.
Did you at least leave some for her?
I think both sides won because all the resources were equal in the end.
I would have hated to be in your shoes, having to basically referee the situation.
I found it quite entertaining actually, watching them argue over nothing.
What did you end up saying to them?
I took sides because I had to make a decision on the spot.
Why do they argue so much? It is a simple game
You know well what they're like, they have competitiveness in our blood
Sometimes fighting over this makes them look really dumb
You better not give them your opinion
I have sadly, I've taken sides.
Oh no you didn't.
My friends and I had a ridiculous argument.
What was the argument about?
We disagreed as to who won the game.
There was a final score so there should not have been a question about that.
I took sides with the friends who feel as you do.
I don't understand why there was an argument in the first place.
I got into a car wreck the other day.
Are you okay?
Yeah, I just got a few bruises, I ended up calling my dad.
What did he say, was he mad at you?
He was mad, but not at me, the guy that hit my car was driving drunk.
That's so scary, I am glad you are okay though.
I am interested in all the new ideas I have.
What changed?
Well Taylor was helping me with the financials and now I need to change some things.
Oh that's good, will you make more money?
Yes, I should be able to double my investments thanks to her.
That is wonderful!
I found the best financial advisor ever today!
Great, tell me about them!
Her name is Taylor, she definitely has my best interest in mind
That is good, I also need a financial planner
You should seek her out, she took her time to discuss various financial situations with me
I will look into her, thanks!
I can't believe that Ash would throw things in my face that I told him in confidence.
That is hurtful especially since Ash knew those were sensitive topics for you.
Yeah. It really hurt and hit way below the belt.
I don't consider that a friend when a person brings up stuff like that.
It was surprising to me and I want to talk to him about it.
Don't get your feelings hurt again by Ash. Let it go.
Ash and I had a bad fight last night. I can't believe what she said to me.
Oh that is horrible. Do you want to talk about it?
I don't know. She accused me of cheating on her with my ex.
That is ridiculous. Your ex hates you.
I know, but she really believes it.
I fell today and almost twisted my ankle!
How did you fall? Are you ok now?
My mother polished the floor and it was so slippery that I skidded and fell completely down!
That's almost funny, but you aren't hurt?
No, I'm fine. I just can't believe I did something so silly.
As long as you are okay.
The floor was wet.  My mom had just cleaned it and I slipped on the linoleum, my tailbone hurt so much I thought I broke.
Did you get yourself checked out by the doctor?
I went to the hospital and they took scans of my body.
What did you find out?
Nothing is broken, I am just terribly bruised.  The doctor prescribed some strong painkillers and sent me home.
You are lucky you didn't break anything.
I squeezed Quinn's hand so hard, I was riding the roller coaster for the first time.
Were you scared?
Oh, terrified.  I was screaming on the top of my lungs the whole time.
You must have been deafening.
That was what Quinn said.  There's a picture of me on the ride looking horrified.
I want to see it.
So I had never been for a rollercoaster ride and Quinn decided to take me to the tallest one in the world.
What a way to start!.
I was honestly shaking, I threw up right before we got on but then afterwards all I wanted to do was get back on it.
How did you get through it?
I held Quinn's hand the whole way.
Whatever helps you get through the fear I guess.
Have you ever been on a rollercoaster?
Yeah me and my friends go all the time. Have you?
Honestly until the other day, never. Quinn took me and I was terrified.
You've just got to grind it out, I find that cursing a lot helps me.
Ah! We were falling and I was properly scared. Quinn's hand was there so I squeezed it as a coping mechanism.
You sure you weren't making a move?
I was pretty brave on that rollercoaster.
Was it your first time on the coaster?
I had never ridden a roller coaster ever before and Quinn rode it with me.
Was Quinn brave, too?
I had to squeeze his hand.
So have you finally changed your mind about rollercoasters?
Our office suppliers have gone bust, so we needed some new ones.
Did you guys manage to brainstorm any ideas in the meeting?
Yeah, my co-workers were really sharp and were trying to solve the issue as soon as possible.
What did you end up with?
Well Bailey managed to find one which was cheaper and better, I ended up writing their name and details on the board.
Good work, that way you won't forget.
God damn, what a stressful day we had.
What happened? You look so tired.
We needed a new supplier as we ran out of fresh bread for our sandwiches and had to shut down for the day.
Bet you had lots of unhappy customers.
Yeah but hopefully we will be back running tomorrow. One of my co-workers gave me a great idea and so I wrote their name on the board.
I hope it's one of the ideas that are easier to implement.
We had a great brainstorming session at work today!
That sounds like it was productive, what did you come up with?
All of my co-workers were coming up with ideas and I was writing them down as quickly as I could`
Did anyone come up with anything extraordinary?
One co-worker had a great suggestion for a new supplier so I wrote the name up on the board.
What a good idea, now it will be there for you to refer to at a later date.
So good being a team leader when your team mates are cooperative.
Heard you guys ran into trouble with some supplier issue?
Yeah, I rounded everyone up and told them to do some research. In less than two hours Harry was able to provide me a plan.
Did you go ahead with it?
Not yet, in the meantime I wrote their name and details on the board and the strategy team is going to take a closer look.
Good stuff.
I couldn't get anyone to come with me to the beach to run but I went anyway.
Well, it's still always important to get exercise regardless if you are alone.
Yes, but I find it more enjoyable and motivating when I'm not alone
Maybe you could try listening to music or a podcast.
I've tried that, but it gets boring after a while.
Hmm, I've heard of apps that simulate running through a different environment using augmented reality. Maybe you could give that a try.
Do you know what? I'm actually kind of glad no one came along. Was fun going on my own.
Yeah I find that, it's basically a mindfulness exercise when you're by the beach.
Do you think anyone else wants to come in the future?
It depends, if it's jogging, probably not.
Damn, why are my friends so lazy.
Gosh what a crazy summer, kind of glad it's over honestly.
Oh yeah didn't you go to some concerts?
I went on tour actually with this band. Well, I followed them to their different tour dates. Twelve concerts total! But they're my favourite band.
Sounds crazy. You must really like them.
I guess you can call me a groupie.
Why would you say that?
I decided to follow my favourite band for the summer.
How is that going?
I have attended every one of their concerts this summer.
Perfect attendance and even better than you did in school.
I am such a fan girl.  I bought tickets to every single concert of my favourite band for the summer.
What's your favourite band?
It's that one with the weird girl with the pink hair and piercings and tattoos all over her face.
Oh that one.  I don't remember her name but I know who you are talking about.
She's so unique and talented, I love her music.
I'm so jealous, you're going to have such a great summer.
I can't believe the summer's over. I'll have to find a new reason to travel.
Why were you traveling so much this year?
I was following my favourite band everywhere they went. I saw every concert.
I can't believe you saw them all. Did they have a busy tour season?
Yes, they were playing almost every weekend.
That's kind of an accomplishment for you too!
I have had a really long day. It seems like I've been away from home forever.
Did you have an early morning?
Yes, really early. I left at 6:30 because I had to open the cafe and work breakfast before I went to class.
That does sound like a long day. Why don't you go home and get some rest.
Because I'm having a good time right now. I'm just not used to being out of the house for so long.
That makes sense. There's always time to rest and relax later.
I went to a party last night and had so much fun. I never danced so much in my life.
Sounds like fun. Who did you go with?
A guy named Ben. You don't know him but I want you to meet him, he's my new partner.
I would love to. Was the party big?
Huge. There must have been 300 people there, in and out of the house.
I had such a great time at the party with Jen.  She's such a party animal.  She danced the night away.
You guys are a great match.
That's what the dating app says.
Is that how you guys met?
I met her online.  We have so much in common.
Couples meet online all the time now.
I had such a great time last night. I'm exhausted, but loved it.
What did you do?
We went to a party, met a ton of people, ate, and danced all night long. So fun.
Wow, that sounds great. Haven't had fun like that in awhile. Hope you and your new partner get on well.
I had a wonderful time last night.
What did you do?
I went to a party with my new partner.
What did you do there?
Mainly we danced, then we played a few board games and then passed out on the sofa.
Good for you guys.
I'm going to have to get my lawn mower repaired.
How did it break?
I accidentally mowed over a pile of rocks in the grass.
That doesn't sound good.
It didn't sound good at all. It made a grinding sound before it stopped.
Maybe you should just buy a new lawn mower.
I found rocks on the grass.
Is that the reason for the lawn mower to stop?
Yes, I heard a grinding sound.
Those rocks damaged it by the looks of it.
I think so, hopefully I can repair it.
I know a place where you can repair that, if you can't do it yourself.
My lawn mower almost got messed up by some rocks in my lawn today,
How big were the rocks?
The size of my hand but I don't know how they got there.
Were they just laying in the grass?
Yeah, almost like they were tossed there.
It was probably some dumb neighbourhood kids then.
I got next to no sleep last night.
Why couldn't you sleep?
I have been struggling with insomnia and there was an actual big brass band outside my window for most of the night.
What! Why was there a band outside your window?
There was some sort of celebration at the park next door. They had permits to play till 12 and they did.
That sucks. Seems like they should have had to stop at 10 or so, people need to sleep.
I can't believe I tried to fall asleep anyway. We have insomnia, and there was a brass band outside our window.
What? What was going on? Were you on the comedy channel?
Unfortunately no. Couldn't call the cops either, cause it was for someone's Birthday party across the street.
Well, at least you were able to make it through the work day today!
Yeah. Maybe we'll get to sleep early tonight.
Yup. You definitely won't have insomnia tonight, that's for sure.
I can't take it anymore, dude. No matter how hard I try, I can't fall asleep!
Insomnia, huh? That sucks. Have you been trying to fall asleep by force?
Yeah, every night I try to sleep. Every day, too! I came close today, but there was a stupid brass band outside making all sorts of noise!
Seriously? A brass band of all things?
Yeah, I guess they were practicing. Either way, I couldn't fall asleep yet again, and that makes four days now.
Go see a doctor, man. It's an issue you need to get addressed!
Sorry I'm late! I spent like two hours looking for Jan's wallet.
I did think something was up, next time just send me a message.
Yeah, apologies. She asked me to look around and then got caught in searching the damn thing.
Very irresponsible of Jan.
At least we found it in the end.
Good stuff.
Jan lost her wallet at my house yesterday. I've been looking for it all night.
You haven't found it yet?
She begged me to find it so I searched everywhere but I don't think it's there.
You have to ask her where she last saw it or you'll be tearing up every room.
I know and I'll call her later.
Maybe she should come over and help.
Guess what, I got an A on that big test I've been practicing for. I think attending that lecture really helped.
That is awesome! I'm so proud of you man.
Thanks, I was worried about it because I missed some classes recently.
How long was the test?
It was about 100 questions and there was a written part as well.
That's a lot of stuff, I'm glad I didn't take that class then.
Are you ready for the big test?
Not really, I did not get to study too much, how about you?
I studied tons last night, really paid attention to the details too. I think I'm well prepared.
Well, how did you do on the test?
I got an A! I am so thrilled!
Great job Alex!
I just got an A on my test!
What? That's great! I thought you were doing terrible in that class!
I was!
How did you manage an A then?
I drank some coffee and actually listened to the lecture!
That's hilarious! Sounds like you need to do that more often!
I just got my score. I got an A!
That's great! I'm so happy for you.
I'm relived, I was very anxious about that test.
How'd you do it?
Honestly, I just paid attention to the lectures in class, It made a big difference.
That's great. I'm going to start taking better notes.
I ended up getting a A on the finals.
I knew that you would, considering how hard you've been studying.
The last lecture that he gave, I tried to listen as hard as I could.
What steps did you take to give it all of your attention.
I remembered what you said about tapping my fingers when he talks.
I am glad that I was able help you find ways to pay attention
Hey, did you know that Sasha and I have been best friends since we were in kindergarten?
No, I didn't know you had known her for so long.
Yes, we went to the same school for 13 years.  We met on the first day of school and became friends right away.
That's amazing!  Most friends lose touch with each other after a few years.
Not us!  We were best friends through primary school and then high school, and we were even each others' bridesmaids at our weddings.
That's really cool.  But personally I don't like Sasha at all. She seems sneaky to me.
Growing up in a small town is way better than a city.
How would you know if you've been a small town person?
I have the same best friend that I had in the fifth grade.
That's a long time.
Yeah, being in the same school for so long is a great thing.
I guess that's pretty cool.
Its been a long time since me and Alice became friends.
How did you guys meet?.
We went to the same school when we were young and we used to do scouts together as well.
You guys did scouts? Would have never been able to tell.
Yeah we were always top of our group as well.
That's a good friendship right there.
I have known Jan a long time.
Didn't you guys go to the same school?
Yeah, we have been best friends forever.
That is great to have such a good friend.
In a way I kind of wish I was fashionably late, didn't want to come off as too keen.
Did you manage to get a date with Sydney in the end though?
Yeah, I picked her up and we went to a bar downtown.
I hope you gave her a good first impression, that's the main thing.
Well, she actually texted me today saying she wants a second date. I suppose that giving her extra time was a good shout in the end.
That's my man.
This is a break or make decision from me.
I see you are in a quandary.
I need to grow my business in one way or another.
What is holding you back?
I have been unsure if we want to open a new location and decided it would be best to move the business forward.
You could be the next Ray Kroc.
I'm thinking of what the next step in my business should be to move it forward.
Are you thinking of launching a new product line?
No, I'm considering opening a new location on Madison Street.
That's a popular location with a lot of foot traffic.
Yes, but the rent is expensive so I'm not sure if it will be worthwhile.
If you're planning on moving your business forward, a new location would be a great start.
The store is bringing in a lot of business. I think the best decision would be to move the business forward.
You picked a central location, it was full when I drove by the other day.
The other store was doing well too, and didn't know if I wanted to take on another.
It looks like it would be worth it, business is booming.
Did I tell you about how I got lost today?
Lost to where?
I was trying to find my way home but got extremely lost.
That sounds frightening, so what did you do after that?
Well I luckily still had a bit of battery left on my phone so I was able to find my way home eventually.
Well I am glad you made it.
I ended up going down a wrong street and ended up downtown.
How long did it take you to find your way out of the city?
A couple hours, even with GPS. Traffic was backed up everywhere.
You know that the music festival was in town, right?
We had success with our vaccination trial in the mice today.
That's good news.
It improves their health overall so I think we'll try to get higher level test subjects next.
I hope it works on people.
It'll be a while before we know but at least we know it has potential.
Congrats on almost finding a cure!
Oh my god, Tracy was unbelievably obnoxious today.
You shouldn't be so harsh with her, she's been quite ill recently.
Maybe she shouldn't be out and about then?
I suppose you have a point.
I was cool with it, until we had that meeting and she was blowing her nose every other minute.
Yeah, that would annoy me too to be fair.
Tracy's been sick with a runny nose so that's why she has tissues with her.
I carry a box of tissues with me when I am sick too.
I told her she should stay in bed and just rest.
Sometimes you have to get out to do things.
She had to do some shopping, she said. She has nothing to eat at home.
That's a good reason to be out.
Tracy has been blowing her nose all day.
I noticed, is she still sick?
I guess so, but what's worse is, I don't think she is washing her hands.
Why would work let her come back if she's that sick?
I have no idea, but I am grossed out.
I finally kissed her last night after our dinner date.
Excellent, my friend, you made the move!
I was so nervous that I was shaking.
Was she willing to kiss you back?
I'm not sure, since I just moved in and kissed her, and didn't really give her much of a chance to kiss back.
From the sounds of it, it seems like she was receptive.
My tooth fell out, so Kendall put money under my pillow while I was sleeping.
Do you believe in that stuff?
You mean the tooth fairy and all that?
Yeah, my mom used to do that too.
I am a grown man now, so I should say I do.
But do you?
I had a visit from the Tooth Fairy last night.
Cool! How much did you get?
A dollar. But I'm starting to doubt that it really was the Tooth Fairy.
You are? Why? Who else would give you a dollar for a tooth?
I was half-awake in the middle of the night and I thought I saw Kendall come in.
I don't know, I believe in the Tooth Fairy. Maybe you just had a dream.
I got money from the tooth fairy!
How did you know it was the tooth fairy that gave you money?
Because my tooth is missing from under my pillow.
How much did he get?
I got five dollars!
Wow! Maybe I should have mine pulled by the dentist too. I can surely use five dollars.
So a part of my tooth fell out and Kendall as a joke put money under my pillow.
Oh! Like you were a kid.
Yes, like I'm waiting for the tooth fairy.
That's pretty funny joke actually.
I did laugh.
Kendall is a funny dude.
I'm starting to doubt myself. I'm wondering if I'm even a good person at all.
I'm sorry to hear about that. Let me know what your thoughts are. You can always talk to me.
I have been somewhat of a bully to others lately and today I did something I'm starting to regret.
I know you've been through a lot lately but you can open up with me. I will not judge you.
I felt like I could use a little more cash. I took Robin's money earlier but I feel guilty.
I can understand you. You've been pretty stressed out lately. And it's a sign of character to open up about this.
This is what I think of that last shot.
Wow it was really that bad?
You didn't even hit the backboard.
Yeah well what about the one last week you broke Ms. Wilsons window with.
We don't talk about that.
She's nuts anyways.
Jordan and I have been really good at communicating lately. We can read the expressions off our faces.
Oh that's how me and my wife are. We can talk about other people without them knowing.
It's useful when I'm irritated because Jordan can pull me out of the situation.
Yea. My wife can give me a look and we're out of there.
It's amazing during parties.
It was the last hour of the fundraiser.  I got in front of the camera and urged people to give generously.
What was this for?
We were raising money for people affected by the hurricane.
Did you raise a lot of money?
We did. A lot of people called in and donated.
That's wonderful that you are helping out.
Almost done for the night guys! Time to get last minute donations in!
What time will the charity close?
In 25 minutes.
I just donated, thank you for all that you do!
No thank you for the donation and support!
I loved the charity function.
Me too they really can help people.
I managed to encourage everyone to give more before it closed.
Good idea, the more the better.
Yeah people seemed excited to wanted to help.
I could see their enthusiasm all night.
Sorry, if I was driving a little fast.
I know you wanted to see the start of the game.
We almost didn't make it. I'm glad I liked it.
I'm was just along for the ride; I'm not a 49er fan.
Well, you should try  seeing Raider games more often.
Once a Raiders fan, always a Raiders fan.  I followed them when they were in L.A. and I can follow them in Vegas.  The magic of television.
I was running late because I had to feed my kid but I eventually made it there.
Did you end up making it on time?
I was a little late for the event but I don't think anyone cared really.
Well at least your boss wasn't mad at for being late to the event.
It was like a scene out of Talladega nights, I tore it up all the way here!
And you didn't get pulled over once? How fast were you going?
I was going about 90 the whole way, and nope, I didn't even see a cop.
Well, even though you were still late, at least you made it and safely too!
I did my best, I felt bad for being late at all though.
Well you should, that's not very nice!
I am sorry I robbed the bank.
Did you really do that?
I got rattled when I saw the police car right behind me with the sirens on.
What did you do?
I stepped on the gas in an effort to get away.
You know that wouldn't work.
I think I'm in big trouble.
What's going on?
The cops are chasing me, I can see the sirens in my rear view mirror.
Why are the cops chasing you?
I just robbed a bank, I have to speed now to evade them.
Go as fast as you can.
I am so grateful to be at home with my wonderful family and friends.
No doubt. How long were you out on the raft?
I was on the raft for 4 days. All I could do is pray that a passing ship would find me.
Luckily one did!
Yes, if not for them, I would probably be dead.
It was a harrowing experience.
Tell me about it.
My little fishing boat hit an iceberg.  It splintered it to pieces.
And the water was freezing.
It sure was, but I got on one section of board that served as a raft.  I floated for days until a passing ship rescued me.
What a story--you're lucky to be alive.
I am so lucky I was saved. I was praying on that raft that a ship would come by and 1 hour later it arrived.
I am so glad you made it home safely. Do you feel like you life has changed?
Yes, I feel like I have a new lease on life. I want to go back to school and make a difference in the world.
That is amazing that you are so positive after such a difficult experience.
I really hope and pray a ship passes by soon or else we may be in trouble.
You don't think we can survive a little longer?
I don't know how much longer this raft will last.
We can just use some of the part to float.
It would be too dangerous. These oceans are full of sharks.
Let's just try to think positive thoughts.
I tried to tell Taylor this one legged man and priest joke , but she didn't think it was funny.
That joke is offensive. You should stop telling it to people.
Aw. People are to politically correct these days.
No, they just don't like being told dumb, hurtful jokes. It's not funny .
I don't think Taylor likes my jokes.
Why do you think that?
I was trying to tell a joke earlier and the look Taylor's face gave me makes me think the joke was offensive.
Was it offensive?
I didn't think it was but I should ask her.
Did you really think the joke i was telling was that offensive.
Well, you didn't have to racist around everyone and it wasn't that funny.
I think maybe I should try and get new material since people didn't like it that much.
Yeah, that's a good idea. maybe try something a little more plain and not be condescending about other races.
I will try and work on it and I'm sorry
Oh my god, Ash.  Could you please just stop talking to me for a minute?
Sure Casey.  I'm sorry. Are you mad at me or something?
Your breath just really stinks and the sound of your voice is giving me a banging headache.
Ok, my bad.  Would you like to go get something to eat, then?
I just want you to back up a little bit.  Your head is so big.
I think I'm just going to go home.  Thanks for a great birthday party.
Thanks for taking me to the zoo.
Which animal was your favorite?
I love the tigers, so majestic.
I like the elephants because they are smart.
I had a really nice time today.
I'm taking you to the aquarium next weekend since you love animals.
Bob and I went to the zoo today.
How was it?
I had a really nice time. It's set up so pretty that it's fun to just even walk around.
I love to see the animals at the zoo.
So do I and the displays are really nice and spacious for them now.
I am glad they take good care of them.
I love the see all of the interesting animals at the zoo.
My favorite animals are the birds.
I love the exotic birds, especially the parakeets.
It is so funny how they repeat what you say.
I went to the zoo with Bob yesterday, and we had a great time. We took pictures of the animals.
I want to see the pictures.
I saw Austin today at the shop. He has really grown.
That's great. Did he like his haircut.
I think so. We had fun. I gave him lollipops and spun him around in the chair.
That sounds fun. I know his mom appreciated you being so kind to him.
She really did and it was a good time.
I bet she will be back to see you next time he needs a haircut.
Your hair looks great from this angle.
Could you cut a little bit more on the left side?
Do you think it looks lopsided?
I think I see a little difference.
The customer is always right. Let me help you out.
I was cutting Austin's hair today.
I hope he enjoyed it.
I spun him around in the chair to give him a stir.
That's funny! You guys are great friends.
I even gave him a discount.
That's nice of you.
I really want you to go with me to the prom.
I can't believe how you're looking at me. I thought we were just good friends!
I was just afraid to tell you how I felt. Will you go with me?
Of course I'll go with you. But you know I can't dance.
That's quite all right. We will stumble around together.
That sounds marvellous. I'm really excited.
I assumed the new girl in my building was mean
why would you think that, just by their looks?
yea they seemed to be that way and I heard that they were pretty aggressive from other people
you shouldn't always believe everything you hear
yea I know that I should of given her a chance and just talked to her sooner
Riley! I've been wanting to talk to you!
Why are you waiting for me here in the hallway?
I just wanted to catch up, since we haven't talked for a while.
Right, I was looking for you at the cafeteria last week too. I guess you are not in that day.
I guess so. My classes are only three times a week now.
I see. I am glad you came to see me. I missed you.
Hey Riley, where have you been? I need to talk to you so I've been waiting here for you since the last bell rang.
Oh, sorry, I had to stay after in my last class for a few minutes to get the assignments from my teacher that I missed when I was out last week.
That's okay, do you have a minute or do you want to walk home together? I really need to talk to you.
Sure, we can walk home together. What do you need to talk about? It seems as though it's really important to you if you waited for me after class.
Well, it's important to me anyway, and I hope that you take me seriously when I tell you what I need to talk to you about.
If it's that important to you than it's important to me, after all, we are best friends. So, tell me what's on your mind.
You really didn't have to give my children all of this food.
It is my pleasure. I know you are going through a lot and you lost your job last month.
But still, you didn't have to spend all of that money for my family on groceries. I really appreciate it.
I wanted to do this for your children.  I'd hate to see them hungry.
My children really love you and so do I.
I know you would do the same thing for me if I was in your position.
Robin has been a very nice person to me since this past month.
Tell me more.
He has been providing food for my children since I lost my job.
Sounds like a generous person.
Believe me he is.
You're lucky to have him then
I really want to thank you for giving me clothes for my kids.
I know it's hard ever since you lost your job last month.
I was just surprised you did it without me even asking you.
I could tell that you were having a hard time and your daughter told me too.
Robin is so sweet.  You know I lost my job last month, and she sent over two big boxes of groceries so my kids would have enough to eat.
That was really nice of her.  I didn't realize you were in such dire straights.  Do you have any leads on a job?
I've put in a bunch of resumes, but I haven't gotten any interviews yet.
Did you apply for unemployment?
I did, and I got approved but I haven't gotten my first check yet.
Let me know if there's anything I can do to help you out.
Taylor accidentally bit my lip really hard when we were kissing today.
Oh no, was it bad?
It made it bleed a little bit but I laughed it off.
Hey, at least that means Taylor seems to like you a lot!
Yeah I guess so, but I still wasn't ready for that lip bite.
I think you need to come back at her next time and bite her and see what she thinks.
Hey Taylor, I finally got a date with Susan but I'm so nervous about kissing her!
Don't be, I'll teach you how to kiss.
Uh, I mean, I guess bro.
Alright, come here and kiss me.
Dude you bit my lip, ouch!
Gotcha!
I just beat Jesse's super tennis ace friend at tennis today. Boy was he shocked.
Wow! That's amazing. I didn't know you were that good .
I have been practicing a lot lately, but I have played since I was a kid.
Are you going to join the tennis team at school.?
Yea , probably. I want to get even better.
So I just won a huge game of tennis.
Who did you beat?
I bet one of Jesses friends who supposed to be the best
I guess that makes you the best now.
Not really but I'm better than them.
What if it was just luck?
I cant believe i won first place in the fishing competition!
you're so lucky. that fish was the biggest fish i have ever seen in my life.
I was using my lucky lure that my dad gave me and it has a rattle inside of it
Do you think i can use it next time when we fish?
Of course you can
How do you like my mounted fish?
Yeah, I was going to ask you about that.
It was my prize for winning first place at the fishing contest.
Congratulations. That must have felt great.
It did. I love to fish.
Maybe one of these days I'll join you.
I love fishing and entered a fishing competition.
How did you do?
I won first place and got my largest fish mounted as a prize.
Congratulations.
I want to take a nap but I am so hungry.
Why don't you eat then take a nap.
I just got back from the museum with the kids.  I think we are all going to order hamburgers.  We are starving.
Where are you guys going for burgers?
The new place down the street.  You want to join us?
Cool.  I'll meet you there.
I had to look away from quinn when i seen her at the mall
Was she walking with her new friends from school?
I seen her with three guys from the football team
i just hope she doesnt cheat on you with them
i really hope so too
Quinn basically blew me off to hang out with her friends.
Are you sure that she didn't already have plans and didn't see your call?
I don't know.
Have you talked to her about it yet?
She texted me a few times but I haven't responded.
Maybe you should.
Would you like to have some coffee with me?
I would love to. Would you like me to make some?
That would be nice. The Percolator is on top of the stove, and the coffee is in the cupboard.
I got it. How do you take your coffee?
With cream and sugar please.
Okay. I'll be right back.
I'm thirsty. Do you guys want something to drink?
Yes, I would like to have a drink.
Is there any specific drink?
Yes coffee to be honest.
Okay, I'll make us coffee on the stove.
Thank you very much.
I was thirsty when we got home.
Did you have a beer?
I wanted to make something to drink.
An alcoholic beverage perhaps?
No, we made coffee on the stove.
Can't get away from that caffeine I see.
I was really thirsty this morning and my coffee pot is broken so I tried to make it a different way.
That sounds really cool, what was the new way?
I made it on the stove, and I even added the milk and stuff before it was completely done.
Oh that seems like it would keep it hot for longer.
It did! I think I may do it this way every time now.
You should! Ill have to try it next time I make coffee.
I took swimming lessons for the first time
Really? That's cool what skills did you learn?
Swimming without protective equipment
That is so cool
Yeah it was so interesting
I'd like to learn to swim also
I finally learned to swim without needing a life vest.
That's impressive. Do you swim in the ocean?
Yes. I learned in a pool. I have been practicing every day.
I'm impressed you can swim in an ocean now.
I can't wait to try out my new skills at the beach.
You're going to love the summertime.
I was really so scared to go swimming for the first time.
Didn't you take lessons?
I did, but I did not get good until I swam everyday.
Did you use protective equipment at first?
At first, but I stopped fairly quickly.
im so proud of the improvement that you put into learning the motions
i just love swimming and i have been practicing everyday
i see you even took off your protective equipment your mom got you
im doing so well i dont even think i need it anymore
that's really impressive bailey
Riley fell off of my bike and skinned his knee up pretty bad.
Isn't he a little small for your bike.
He is way too small. I did not tell him to take it out. And he actually had the nerve to blame me for falling.
How was him falling your fault?
He said I had the seat too high. I reminded him it was just right for me.
That's funny. I guess he learned his lesson.
I really put Casey to the test.
Did you ask her hard questions?
Oh yeah.  She held her own though.
Seems like she is pretty strong.
They won't let Sklar go down the water slide if she doesn't listen to the safety precautions.
What is it that she is not listening too?
It's not that she isn't listening, I am not sure she understands where her arms have to go.
Do you want me to walk up there and show her that her arms need to be on her chest?
No, the lifeguard will help her if she doesn't get it.
That is true, I hope she does it!
Skylar's husband is such a klutz. He almost dropped his camera off of the cruise ship into the ocean. I had unusually quick reflexes and as it slipped out of his hand, I quickly leaned over the railing and caught it by the strap!
Wow, good job! Lots of people drink on cruises. You sure he wasn't drunk?
He might have been. He was being a little creepy winking at me and stuff. Then he saw a whale and just needed to snap a picture!
Glad you still felt the need to save his camera after all that. If he was behaving like that towards me, I would let the sharks eat his camera, ha ha ha!
So I grabbed the camera before it went into the water.
Skyler must have been so happy.
She was. But her husband was all wet.
LOL. You didn't grab him before he fell in too?
A little water won't kill him.
Hey Skylar, your husbands camera is going to fall!
Cliff, watch out! It's falling!
I'm going to jump for it!
It is way too dangerous to do that!
I got it! It's not broken!
We have the contracts signed, and everything's ready to go on our first serious construction project.
Where are you building?
Central city, site of the Marathon One building they just demolished.
Wow! That's a major deal! A billion dollars easy!
You bet it is, more actually, and we're on a tight deadline. So we need to get started.
Excellent, Carson! Best wishes!
You know the company I work for is expanding into new markets.
What is your part in this expansion?
I'm moving things forward for the company.
What does that mean?
I don't know, that's what they told me to say.
Sounds like you have no idea what's going on do you?
When I was boiling water for my dinner I anciently knocked over the pot. Lucky I was able to pick it up right away. But the water was hot
Yea I bet, was the water boiling yet?
Not yet but it was getting close, but it was still really hot and took me by surprise.
That sucks, did you have to start over with your dinner prep.
Yea but its ok I wasn't too far in to it.
I was almost scarred for life.
What happened?
I was boiling a pot of water for pasta and knocked it over.
That's so close to having bad burns.
I know, I have to be more careful.
We don't need you bandaged up in the hospital.
I'm going to get painting supplies for the living room today.
I thought you were going to wallpaper it?
No, I prefer paint and I need a bunch of supplies.
Yeah, I've never been a big fan of wallpaper either.
I think I'm ready to fix up the room. I bought all the materials I need to paint it. I decided against wallpaper.
Good decision. I love sprucing up rooms. Once it's done, you feel so accomplished.
I can't wait to feel that way. I'm dreading the actual work.
Once you get going, you'll get into a groove and it'll go by fast.
I sure hope so.
I am grateful to have chosen paint over wall paper.
I agree, wall paper is so drab and outdated.
It's definitely not contemporary.
Glad you brought all the supplies, this will be a long day painting.
It will be fun, let's get started.
I'll grab the buckets.
I just got back from the hardware store.
How is the  small home project going?
It's going well I just needed to get some primer and a different color wallpaper.
What color did you decide on for the wall paper?
I decided to go with a 3D effect type of wallpaper.
That sounds really cool I'm glad you didn't go with a boring solid color.
I met my friend's wife for the first time.
Who's your friend?
You know, my childhood friend, from high school who lived next door to me.
You talking about John? How is he?
He's married now to this sweet woman he met in college.  They almost to have their first child.
So much has happened in life.
I met his wife finally.
Wow, I thought he was hiding her from you.
No, she works a weird shift and was never around.
So what do you think of her?
I think that she is very cool. We can have her join one if our groups.
Anytime we can add one more person to our game nights it's awesome.
We've been through a lot together since we were kids.
Yeah Casey, we went from childhood friends to having a relationship in high school, to now being good friends.
Yeah, we've came a long way.
Yeah, I'm glad we got close.
I've been thinking, its time you meet my wife for the first time.
Yes, I would be happy too.
Nice to see you after so long.
Yeah, you too.
Is this your wife?
It is, glad you two could finally meet.
Nice to meet you.
She is grateful for that.
I just spent some money and I think it was a mistake!
Why? What did you buy?
It's not that. I bought clothes, but that's not the point.
Ok. So what's the issue here?
Well, I needed the money for rent!
So why not return the clothes and wait to buy them after the rent gets paid?
I really shouldn't money on things I don't need because I need to save it for rent, but I did anyways.
What did you spend your money on?
I bought some really cool sneakers.
Those are hard to resist.
Yeah they are.  I have a huge collection of sneakers.
I feel your pain.  They can get expensive.
I know I'm not supposed to spend any money right now, but I got to buy this new cell phone.
I thought you need to pay your rent soon, didn't you just tell me you don't have enough?
Yes I do, but my cell phone is not working anymore.
Where you getting get some money for it?
Let's check it out they might have some installment plans that I can avail.
Right. You really are so smart. Let's check them out!
I searched for a video online about how to use Paypal to pay for something.
What for?
To pay for something I bought on eBay.
What did you buy?
I thought that would be harder but i guess i was wrong
i made them easier for you since i knew you had a rough week
things  have been so hard working two jobs and getting all this overtime
you could move in with me if you dont think you can pay rent
i guess i will think about it
I am exhausted and depleted!
You've had a very long day Kai, don't be so hard on yourself.
I hate my job and feel like I should quit!
No Kai, don't do something that you might later regret, give it time.
I am just going to sit here and drink a couple of beers and we can talk.
That's a great idea Kai.
all I wanted was just help on the project for work, but no one wanted to help me.
that sucks didn't you talk to them and try to work on it as a group?
I tried but all they wanted to do was to be on their phone and mess around
that is not good, maybe you should go to your boss with the problem too see if you all can fix it for next time.
Oh my boss does not care ,he spends most of his time on the phone doing whatever he wants.
I would say you try to look for another job because you can not be happy with people like that around you.
Riley is my good friend!
I can see you always enjoy her company!
Yes and her Kids company too. i took Rileys kids yesterday.
It must be fun with them right now!
Yes! it is fun with them
I am in the process of babysitting right now
that sounds fun. Whose kids are you watching?
I am with Riley's kids for a couple of days while they are away
oh nice, where did they do?
they are on an anniversary trip in Bermuda
that is really cool, have fun with the kids!
What do you want to play together?
How about jump rope and pogo stick?
Okay that sounds fun, let me go and get them.
Great! Wow these are so much fun.
I know, I want to play with them for hours.
I do too,  I mean it is not like I have to go anywhere.
Since the weather has gotten nice I have been playing outside a lot more.
I know I really have been enjoying the nice weather also.
I got a pogo stick that I have been getting a lot better at.
I have never done a pogo stick, is it hard?
Not really. I am getting better at my jump rope also.
I am really good at jump rope. We should do it together one day.
I got a new pogo stick and jump rope.
Have you played with them yet?
I played with them in the yard for hours.
Did you get tired?
Yeah, and it was getting dark so I stopped.
You can play again tomorrow when it's light out.
Casey, thank you so much for cleaning up after the party, you are the best!
No problem, I knew you were hung over and if your mom seen the house like that she would have freaked out!
I owe you big time! You even straightened up the counters and tables!
Hey I have seen your mom when she's mad haha, not happening on my watch!
Haha she can be a little scary, thanks again, you have no idea how much I appreciate that
You are welcome and remember you owe me!
That was a messy party last night.
I think too many people came over to your house.
It wasn't too bad, especially since Casey was such an angel and cleaned up afterward.
Did Casey clean the whole house for you?
Yes, Casey set the entire house in order after the party.
Casey is such a hero.
I talked to Remy yesterday. Did I tell you what he asked me?
No, I haven't heard yet.
Remy wanted to know if I would join him on a trip to Italy and Rome this summer.
Wow, that's quite an opportunity!
I know, I'm not sure if it will be a good idea for me though.
Well I'm sure you have time to think about it.
I'm going to Italy this summer!
Wow, are you going for vacation?
No, I'm going to be studying abroad there with a host family that Remy knows.
Oh, that's so cool. Are you excited?
I absolutely cannot wait. I have to start packing.
Have a great trip and send me updates!
I'm just so excited to get to Italy for the summer!
I'm glad Remy was able to connect you with the school headmaster, that was good luck!
The best luck! It's such a great opportunity to study and check out the country. I've been brushing up on my Italian.
Where do you think you'll travel?
I definitely want to tour Rome. There's so much history there.
That sounds like a great plan. I'll want to see a lot of pictures!
I have just been so busy at the hospital.
I am sure with everything happening with the virus.
I finally was able to go last night a buy groceries at the store.
I would have went shopping for you, if you needed the help.
I have been putting it off since last week and need to do something else beside take care of dying people.
You still need to take care of yourself.
I've been so busy at work.  I am completely out of food.  I can't procrastinate anymore so I finally bought some food.
What did you buy?
I bought all of my favourites, like yogurt and chicken and pasta.
You always eat so healthy.
I want to stay fit and healthy so I try to watch the food I eat.
I wish I can be like you.
I finally got to the store.
When did you go?
Well, I was really tired after work, but I went then anyway.
Why didn't you just go home?
I'd been putting off shopping all week, so I just had to go.
Well, everyone does need to eat.
I'm looking for three snacks to bring to the sleepover.
Choose both sweets and non sweet treats.
I'm picking two bags of chips, one Doritos and and one Cheetos. I'm also choosing a honey bun.
Those are delicious.
I'm taking my snacks to the counter to pay the cashier.
I'm going to do the same with my snacks now.
What snacks do you want?
I want some cheeto's. Here is the money to cover them.
This sleepover is going to be so much fun!
Put this drink on the counter too. I know, We just got go pick up the burgers.
Are you packing for the sleepover tonight at Aubrey's?
Yep, headed to the kitchen to grab the drinks and ice.
Cool, I already picked out all my fav snacks and have them on the counter for you to pack.
Awesome, did you grab my pringles from the top shelf?
Of course, God forbid you don't have your pringles.
Hey those are a perfect sleepover snack, so yum!
I am thinking about throwing a New Years party.
Oh how fun!
Yeah I am sure there will be a lot of people.
Definitely! Count me in!
Okay will do. It should be a good time.
I am sure that it will.
I really hope my party runs out well next week
I'm sure it will! What's the occasion?
It's just a New Year party for all my friends
That sounds really fun! I'm sure you'll get a big turnout
I appreciate the support! You're obviously invited too
Thanks! I'll definitely be there
Glad you could make it Jan.
No problem, Riley. I wouldn't miss your New Year's Party for the world.
Let's all get drunk. I don't think I've ever partied with you before Jan.
Are you expecting a lot of people at the party. I'm a really wild girl.
Don't worry no-one here minds. Just don't get lost when the action starts. I'm expecting quite a large turnout.
I'll never leave your side all night Bailey.
It's my daughter's first birthday today!
Awesome.  Are you going to do anything fun?
We are having a party this afternoon around three in our backyard.
Sounds fun!  Can I come?
Of course you can come!  Don't worry about bringing a gift unless you want to.
I found the perfect thing for this occasion!
It was an amazing day!
What happened during the party?
I got a bounce house for all of the kids!
Did they enjoy it?
Yes!  They bounced for three hours!
Wow that sounds amazing!
It was my daughter's first birthday today.
Wow, time flies.
I know. I want to make it special so I can get lots of pictures and so she is happy.
That sounds great. Will you have a party?
Yeah, we will. Are you going to come?
Sure, I'll be there.
My baby's first birthday is next week.
How special. What do you plan on doing?
Do you have any suggestions?
Kids love animals. Maybe throw a party at the zoo.
Great idea! And then some ice cream afterwards.
I'm not sure why adult parties aren't like that too.
I'm throwing a huge party next Saturday and you're invited.
What's the celebration for?
My kid's first birthday is this week and I wanted to have a special day.
How exciting! What should I get her?
Nothing that makes a lot of noise or you're babysitting her.
I don't mind babysitting.
John has taken it too far this time.
What did he do now?
He hit me.
That's horrible!
Yeah, I'm filing for a divorce.
He definitely crossed the line.
I see all your friend got hired!
I followed your advice about that Mr. Jones like girls that wear blue heels and black skirts.
It is just one of his fetishes. He always hires girls that wear them.
They told me they will tgive you a piece of their first cut.
Have you looked out by the driveway yet this morning?
I haven't, I just got up. Why? Did raccoons get in the garbage again?
No, something more exciting than that. I got a new car! It's parked right outside.
No way! Is it the one you test drove last week?
It is, I couldn't stop thinking about it so I went and bought it this morning.
Awesome. You taking me out for a spin?
I think the cake really turned out well
It looks a little lopsided over here on this side though.
That's ok we can just cover it up with a little icing.
That's a good idea Skylar, no one will even notice really.
Hey come here and taste this cake, it is finally done!
Oh it tastes really good, it came out exactly the way we wanted it to.
Do you think our customers will like it though?
If I like this cake, I am sure that the person picking it up will too.
Why do you say that?
Well I don't really like cake that often but this one is really good.
The cake is ready!
wow, it's taken 2 hours!
Yea, it's a big cake!
Man, this smells.
It must be one of the ingredients.
yea likely!
I made a cake last night.
How long did it take you?
After I mixed all the ingredients and put it in the oven it took about 2 hours.
That's not that long. Maybe I should try baking a cake.
You should. It was really fun.
I'll keep that in mind next time I feel like cooking.
I was so lucky when my car broke down yesterday.
Having your car break down doesn't sound lucky.
No, but I was lucky because Cameron was driving home from work and noticed me on the side of the road.
That was lucky because he usually works at the district office.
That's what he told me while we were waiting for the tow truck.
I'm glad he was able to help you out, he's a really nice guy.
Hey, what's up friend?
Hey Aubrey, nothing much you tell, what is going on?
You know I stuck down at the road when my car broke.
Oh... did Cameron help you fixing the car?
No he did not help me.
That's not nice.
My car broke down today on the side of the road.
I hate it when that happens. I never know what to do.
Luckily I called Cameron. He came by and helped me out. He was even able to fix the car.
I'm not surprised. Cameron used to work in the automobile industry, so he knows a lot about cars.
Hey, you know that party I'm planning next week?
Yeah, looking forward to it!
Me too! I'm making up a list of all the food and beverages I'll need and it just keeps getting longer and longer!
Ha! I know what you mean! You sure don't want to run out of food, especially for the kids! You know how they eat!
Oh, my gosh, you're right! I'll need to add more finger foods for the kids! Thanks for the reminder!
No problem! See you next week, and don't worry! It'll be great!
What do you think about adding Kool-aid and cookies to the list?
I thought we already had all the food and drinks we wanted for the party written down.
We did, but I suddenly remembered we're going to have kids there and should buy something for them.
That's a great idea. Definitely add the Kool-aid and cookies!
O.K , we've got to plan the party.
Well, you already have a list of food and drink.
It doesn't seem right.
What's the problem.
I see it; I'm adding some things that the kids will like.
Good, that should take care of it.
I feel so nauseous right now I think I'm going to be sick.
What happened why do you feel sick?
I heard Robin throwing up she asked me to leave the room but I could stay hear her throwing up.
That would definitely make me feel sick too.
I just need to seat down for a little while.
Would you like some water or ginger ale?
I tried my best but she hated the zoo.
I thought she was a huge fan of animals?
She is, just not ones that are locked in cages against their will.
That is a good point as there's a huge crowd growing against the zoos right now.
When you think about it, they are like jail.
Except animals don't commit any crimes to be there.
You know my dogs have been so good to me. I don't think I could deal with being homeless without them.
Animals really can help you get through anything.
They definitely can. The other day I had gotten some fries from Kai, but then I saw the dogs starving so I fed the food to my dogs rather than me.
That was pretty selfless of you.
I don't see it that way. The dogs are really how I survive so it was important I feed them.
I am glad you have those dogs.
Someone gave Kai some fries for us to eat.
Did Kai share with you?
Yeah, but I ended up giving my half to the dogs because they needed to eat.
That was nice of you, but you need to eat Kendall.
I know, I know.
I gave Kai some fries to eat when he hung out with me
Oh curly fries? I love those!
Yeah but his poor dogs were starving so I gave them some too as a special treat
I hope they eat them up
They sure did
I want to meet with you two later
I think I'm going to give some of these fries to the dog, they've got to be hungry too
You're too sweet. DO you feel full?
Not really but I got enough. The dogs have to eat too
I wish I could help you out more but things are tight for me too
I appreciate everything you do for me already, you don't need to do more
I know, I just want to
I'm hungry but so are my dogs.
Give the dog some fries.
Here you go boy.
See the dog loves the fries.
Yea that will keep them fed for a while.
That reminds me of my grandson.
You know I am afraid of heights right?
Yes I do. Did you face your fears?
I had to go on a ladder today.
Really, what for?
I needed to clean the roof of some shrubs.
Im proud that you did this.
Ash is very lazy.
You don't have to work for Ahs.
I ended up doing both of our shares of work.
Ash was just using you.
She is just lazy.
Wake up Riley. You are being used.
Ash was so annoying.
Why? Did you not work well together?
The only person working was me! I had to do everything for Ash.
Can you talk to the teacher about that?
I think I am going to it made me so mad.
Sorry, that sucks.
I'm getting tired of working with Ash. I had to do all the work earlier today even though Ash was supposed to help out.
Why couldn't Ash help with his fair share of the work?
There was no reason. He's just really lazy.
You should avoid working with him in the future. He sounds like dead weight.
As an avid reader, I held out as long as I could on e-book readers.
I know your big when it comes to actually turning the pages with your fingers.
There's something about the smell of a book that you cannot replace.
You are right about that, books have great characteristics.
The Raiders just give you that huge selection right at your fingertips.
It's like having your own library at home.
Hey so you wouldn't believe what I just bought.
Oh, didn't know you were buying new stuff right now.
Yeah, I just got an awesome e-book reader!
That's great as I know you are always reading.
Indeed, I want to read everything I can get my hands on!
That's the one thing I love about you, your enthusiasm.
I made one of the best purchases I have ever made yesterday
what did you buy?
I bought an e-book reader!
thats great, I love mine
yeah! I love reading so it's a great gift to myself
you will enjoy it for a long time
You know I like to read right? I finally got myself an e-book reader.
Wow, you really just got one now, they've been available for years?
Yes, I still like real books better since they are tangible.
I can understand that, I have a problem with collecting things.
Yeah, I have a book collection but am running out of room so I thought it was a good idea to go digital.
That makes a lot of sense. Plus you will have your books wherever you go.
Do you know any places that are renting out right now?
I thought you liked your apartment.
I did, but the rent is going up.
How much is it going up by?
Three hundred dollars.
Wow, it went up a lot!
My landlords raised my rent by $300.  I am going to move next month.
That's a huge increase.
It is.  I can move out of the city and find something much nicer for cheaper rent.
How you started looking yet?
I actually already found a place.  A few of my friends and I are renting a house in the valley.
Awesome.
I'm going to be moving out of my place.
What did you decide to do that?
My landlord is raising my rent by 300 dollars.
Wow, that is a lot.
Exactly. I can find a better place for around the same price.
If you want, you can move in with me.
I am one of those pro things.
What is a pro thing?
I'm a procrastinator.
You put the pro in procrastinate.
After waiting until the day before the project was due, I started last night.
There is no money in being that kind of pro.
I only just now started working on the project.
But it's due tomorrow! You had all week to work on it.
I know. I'm a terrible procrastinator.
You're probably going to have to work through the night to finish it.
I just kept putting it off and putting it off.
You're such a procrastinator.
I know. I didn't start the project untill last night and it was due today.
Oh no! Were you able to finish?
Yes, I think my projects go even better when I start them late.
I'll take your word for it.
So what flavor do you want Sidney?
I don't now so many flavors to pick from.
You have to make a choice there are people waiting in line.
So hard, so hard, you make the choice for me.
Ok but no complains if you don't like my choice.
Don't worry I know you have a good taste for things.
Since she was taking for ever I had to make the choice myself.
Were you in a hurry?
We have to get back to the house as people are waiting on us.
She can be indecisive when it comes to things.
No matter what it is, it takes forever.
Some people just need a lot of time to make choices.
I need to write some more content for my blog this weekend.
Yeah, I checked out your new blog yesterday. It looks really nice.
Thanks! I'm hoping to reach more people and get some more business.
Definitely a good idea. I think it'll improve your sales and get you more referrals.
I'm hoping so. It's been a lot of work to get it up and running, so I hope it's worth it.
I'm sure it will be. Let me know if you want me to proofread your next post.
I'm really struggling to improve my business sales.
What have you tried to turn your business around?
Well, I launched a new product line and also just launched a new blog.
Those should be good revenue generators.
I hope so, but the blog domain name was expensive to buy.
I'm sure it will pay off in the long run.
Here take this first aid kit, it'll help you with that wound.
Oh sweet thanks! Luckily it's not too bad
Yah that could have been way worse! You fell on that rock pretty hard!
I know, if I had fallen just a little bit farther left i would have hit my head
THat would have been bad. You lucked out
I know! I'll be more careful next time
I had to use my field training on Alex today.
Did Alex get hurt?
She fell during volleyball really hard and I think she sprained something.
You wrapped it for her?
Yes and she held the kit and was really good about it.
I hope she's okay to play again.
Wow, that was a tough game.
Yeah, it was very intense. But we won thanks to you!
Aww that's not true.
It is though! You saved us at the end with that crucial block
That was an awesome play, I was pretty proud of that.
Yeah! You saved the game!
It was the bottom of the ninth, two outs, the bases were loaded, we were behind by two, and of course it was my turn at bat....
Not like there's any pressure to that.
Right. But I managed to send the ball over the short-stop's head, and when the fielder picked it up finally, he threw it past the third baseman...
So how many of your runners got in?
Two, just enough to tie the game. We won after two innings of overtime.
So you saved the day!
I can't believe I finally hit a home run!
Yeah, and it was the game winner too, I'm so happy for you.
I never thought I'd hit one, I've been playing for over 3 years and never did.
It was all the practice you put in to this game, Sasha I'm telling you.
The feeling of circling the bases knowing we won was the best feeling ever.
Yeah you looked so happy coming into home base.
The baseball game was SO INTENSE!
Really?  I'm so sad I missed it!
Yeah, you really missed a dramatic ending!
Now you're making me feel bad!
You missed my moment to shine, I totally saved the game at the last second!
Well I will make sure to be there next time.
So today was my first day on the new set with the director with the new script and oh boy it wasn't good from the get go!
Oh no, did you not like the set, what was wrong?
The set was great, the director was great, the script...not so much. There were so many vulger words, I told him I absolutely would not say those things!
Weren't you afraid of being replaced?
Of course, but I just couldn't go with that script and in the end he agreed and made the necessary changes for me, he was great
Oh my gosh, I think you got lucky there!
Hi. I wanted to talk a bit about the script.
Sure, what are your thoughts?
Well I wanted to discuss the second act. I think we could change some things that would make the story more fluid.
Ok, I'm always open to feedback.
Great! I'll email you my notes.
Awesome! I'll read those over tonight and make the changes, you always have great feedback.
It was intimidating, but I felt I had to stick up for myself. Even with a director of that stature.
You must have been scared silly on the inside.
I was, at first. But he listened to me, and really heard what I had to say.
Good. Those script revisions are going to make a huge difference.
Right? Otherwise my role just doesn't make sense. Thank goodness he agreed with me.
At the end of the day, everyone just wants the film to be good. You're all after the same thing.
I spoke with the director, and had some changes made to the script.
Oh yea, How did the director feel about making the changes?
I don't think he wanted to at first, but realized it was all in the best interest of the play.
I think that the changes will make the play even smoother, it will flow better with them.
I agree, I'm glad he took the time to listen to me, and understand where I was coming from.
I can't wait to hear the script with your changes in it.
Ugh I really hated the movie script they wrote.
Why, what was wrong with it?
There were just some really disrespectful jokes about women.
Ugh that is so gross. What did you do?
I actually spoke to the director and had them change it.
That's so brave of you, I'm glad you did that.
Let's drink guys!
Dude we are so hungover.
I don't care I'm still fine.
Yea but you are an animal.
Let's just workout tomorrow.
Sounds good light it up.
Alright boys time to start again.
I'm so hungover i cant even walk.
You know what they say, only way to cure a hangover is with a shot.
I guess you're right.
Lets go boys!
Alright.
Let's get some drinks and party!
I still have a hangover from last night
The best way to get rid of it is drink some more
Yeah man, then what are we waiting for
Let's get to it
Then let's get on with the party
Do you want a Mimosa with breakfast?
No way, I feel sick from drinking so much last night.
Sometimes, a little alcohol can actually cure a hangover!
I'm not so sure about that.
Just take a few sips and see what you think.
Ok, I guess I'll have a glass.
I really fooled Addison.
What did you do?
She keeps buying me things because she thinks I'm a good guy.
That's really not a nice thing to do.
Maybe not, but it's free stuff.
It will all come back to get you in the end.
I feel that we are very virtuous in the way we approach this problem.
Yes, let's just go ahead and dump the chemicals down the river for faster transport.
It won't hurt the fish as it said in the studies we read.
I don't think those studies are conclusive but this is the best way to get rid of this waste.
Plus, it will save us a lot of time and money.
I think we are doing the right think here.
The white dress, gives you the virgin look.
I have to keep up the pretences to get the money.
Yes, you must be a virgin to marry the old bastard.
One more week, and then we will have what we need.
I don't think Addison has any idea of how wicked I really am.
You do a good job of acting like you're a good guy.
As long as I give her the appearance that I'm virtuous, she'll continue to be my friend.
I don't think you'll have any issues doing that.
How is it that you're still my friend?
Because I might be just as wicked as your are.
I was at work yesterday when my phone rang.
Who was calling?
It was my daughters school.
Is she OK?
I was so scared that I drove so fast.
I am glad everything is OK.
I had to rush home last night.
Why, what happened?
I received a phone call that my friend was coming over.
Did you make it back in time?
No, she ended up waiting outside for me for almost an hour.
That is a really long time, but good thing she waited for you.
I'm sorry that I had to run away so fast.
Don't worry about it,  it's all right.
I knew you would understand because you're a great friend.
We all have had emergency calls that we needed to take care of right away.
That's true, but some people still don't understand.
Those people are friends.
It has taken me quite a long time, but I think Kendall and I are finally good friends.
That's good. How did you build a relationship with her?
I just made her feel like she was safe with me and eventually she started coming around.
That's always a good idea; making others feel safe and comfortable.
Yep. She was standoffish at first, but with time we have grown very close.
It's good you guys were able to build such a close bond.
She is just off putting.
She may be going through some stuff, and just doesn't want to talk about her past.
We have somewhat a relationship now at work, but it is very tense.
Just give her time, Kendall may have went thru some kind of trauma.
I tried to get my dog to exercise more by running around the block. I thought he would keep up, but he barely followed me.
Does the dog have a weight problem?
Yes, he is overweight. The vet said to feed him less, but it is not working.
Are you the only one feeding him?
No the kids do too. They sneak him food in secret even after I told them to stop.
I work at another job on weekends.
It's good money there.
I only made ten dollars today.
Good for you man.
Yea that's not too bad.
Yea you are a hustler.
Too many things to do. I really want to relax!
Finish all your chores first sis!
But I want to relax. Can you help me sis? Do the chores instead.
Okay. But what will you trade for it?
I will give you my dessert for dinner. Deal?
Don't back down to your words, okay? Deal.
I feel kind of bad for something I did yesterday
Oh man, what did you do this time?
So I was supposed to do a bunch of chores that my parents asked me to do, but I wanted to relax instead
so did you end up doing any of the chores? why do you feel bad?
I feel back because I told my little sister to do all my chores and she did them for me
I see how that can make you feel bad, maybe you can make it up to her.
I'm really enjoying reading this book.
You are always reading.
I am learning so much from this from this one.
You are a very well read person, I know you love to read.
Yeah, I'm always reading and in the middle of a book.
I know.
I read a lot. I'm on my twentieth book this year.
What kind of book are you reading now.
A book about politics and how Trump was able to win the election.
You always know so much about different things. You're very well read. Is that from reading all this books?
Yes, but I read both fiction and nonfiction.
It must get expensive to read all of those books. I just don't have time to read with my kids.
I'm trying to finish up this book that I started a couple weeks ago.
What is this book about?
It's about what it's like to be black in America.
That sounds very deep.
Anytime you read books like these, you really learn a lot.
Yeah, you're right.
Oh I bet these cookies are going to taste so good.
As long as we get the recipe right, I can hardly read this writing.
Two cups of flower and a three quarter cup of sugar.
Mix it together. This tastes good.
Alex is a really smart kid.
Is that one of your students?
No, his my nephew I taught him how to read.
Oh I see, at what age.
He was 4 years old and picked up the pace quickly.
Impressive you must be really proud of him.
I always knew how smart my Alex is.
Yes he is one very intelligent boy.
That he is. I even taught him to how to read when he was only 4 years old.
That is very impressive!
I know I'm biased but I think so too.
You are not wrong!
I bought Alex a couple more books today. He loves to read.
Alex? He's only 5 years old.
I know. He's always been really smart and he learned to read when he was four.
Wow, that's amazing. He should do well in school, then.
I hope so. He likes to read but I don't know about everything else yet.
Alex is so smart I taught him to read at 4 years old
What that's crazy! How much could he read
He could read like 1st grade level books
How much help did he need?
he didn't even need help after a while
That's awesome, you must have been a good teacher
I can't understand why there is always such a long wait at the hospital. My son only needs a few stitches.
What happened that he needs stitches.
He fell off his bike. I need to put elbow pads on the kids because he is always falling.
As a boy dad you will spend lots of time in hospitals for stitches - get use to it.
We are going on an hour. How much longer will I have to wait.
As long as it takes. They are giving other patients the same care that you'll get.
Ouch are you okay?
I'm going to need stitches!
Let's get this fixed at the hospital!
Ok
Hurry I'll drive.
It's right up the street.
I am pretty sure Taylor got my son sick with the flu!
Why do you think it was Taylor?
He went to the Dr and was diagnosed with the flu and has been walking around coughing on everything and everybody!
That's terrible he needs to be more mindful about the people around him when he is sick
I agree, my son might not be sick if Taylor would wash his hands more often and keep to himself until he is better
I agree, I hope they are both feeling better soon!
I'm so annoyed with Taylor. Did you hear what he did?
I can't imagine. Taylor's usually so considerate.
Not this time. He knew he had the flu but he still came over to our house for dinner.
That's pretty irresponsible, especially with your kids in the house.
That's what I'm saying. And of course, my son ended up getting sick from it.
Poor little guy. I don't blame you for being irritated with Taylor.
You know, I'm really upset you got my son sick.
I am really sorry-I had no idea I had the flu!
Doesn't matter. You've got to be more careful about spreading germs!
I know, but I had no idea I was sick! What was I supposed to do?
You should always be careful not to spread germs whether you think you're sick or not. Wash your hands, don't cough or sneeze on people. You know, normal stuff!
Makes sense. Never thought about it that way. So sorry.
I finally told Aubrey what I use to do for a living.
How did she take the news about you keeping it hidden for so long.
She was pretty pissed that I lied about what I did for a living during that time in Vegas.
I told you to tell her the truth about you being a dancer, when you met her.
I thought she was not date me.
If you told her the truth, she would not be thinking you lied about everything in your relationship.
It's really fun to be with Aubrey.
What did you two talked about?
I told him many tales about years I spent as a dancer in Las Vegas show.
And you called that fun?
It's fun, if you were there.
I wished I was.
It's true, I loved dancing! I think I professionally danced for about five years when I was younger.
Really? I didn't know that! Around here?
No, in Las Vegas. I was in a show at Caesar's, every Thursday and Friday.
That must have been so glamourous! Did you meet lots of celebrities?
There were quite a few interesting people I got to meet. Lots of fun and crazy times, but I don't really miss it that much.
I'm sure it was a lot of work. And so far away from home.
So after my first year in Las Vegas, I knew that was where I wanted to be.
Did you get a job as a dancer right away.
Oh, no way, Aubrey. I had to audition over and over again before I could get even the smallest of roles. But things picked up.
How long were you there before you started working steadily?
I got my first permanent job in Vegas in May, so I was there about 8 months before I was making a steady paycheck.
8 months is not too bad as long as you were able to support yourself in the interm.
You know. I really don't miss working outside the home that much.
Dis you give it up for the kids?
Yeah. I used to work a lot, but since having children, my priorities have changed.
It sounds like you've changed a lot.
I have. I'd rather spend my time with my kids now.
I don't blame you. And I'm glad you are able to stay home with them.
I am quite busy at home these days.
What's going on?
I'm spending a lot of time with my kids.
Sounds lovely. What were you doing prior to staying home?
I used to work a lot prior to having kids.
Glad to hear you're being a good parent.
Being a mom is so much work compared to being a CEO.
You're joking right?
Nope, you think a CEO has to change diapers, deal with crying babies, keep them entertained, cook, clean, shop, pay bills and keep a husband happy?
Whoa, you got a point.
So I am the CEO of my domain!
Okay, I am stepping down as CEO of our company. Hope that's cool with you.
I have been slacking off at work.
But you have a lot of kids. They keep you busy.
I know. I hope I can get back to work one day.
Yeah, you used to work a lot. I know you must miss it.
I do. But you're right. My kids keep me busy and I want to dedicate my time to them.
You're a great mom.
Here it is man all that you've been waiting for, the line to get into your hockey dream team!
Yeah... all my life's work, blood sweat and tears finally the hockey team interview...
Like you said blood sweat and tears, you got this!
I'm sweating bricks man, it's almost my turn
This is what dreams are made of, get in their!
Thanks for the push, you're the best friend ever!
Come on, Cameron. The line has moved forward.
Uh, I'm not sure I really want to do this haunted house.
It'll be fine. It's not that scary.
But what if I pee my pants?
It's not that scary! And when have you ever peed your pants?
It could happen!
Put the baby up for adoption.
Let's make enough money.
Okay then we don't have to.
let's work really hard.
Yea we need some help in life.
Let's turn our life around.
I just hope I don't regret my decision.
That's a really tough thing to choose, but I think you did the right thing.
I know I couldn't make enough money to take care of her, as much as I wanted.
The family you chose is so great, she's going to have a really happy life.
I think adoption will allow us to both do well and be okay.
It's true. You made a good decision for both of you.
I don't know what to do anymore, I have no money for my baby.
You need to figure out a way that you can make money.
At this point it's too late.
So, what are you planning to do?
I'm going to put my baby up for adoption.
It's your decision, so I support you.
I'm so sorry to hear about your Grandmother Rose.
I appreciate it. She was my favorite.
Grandparents are definitely special.
Thank you so much for the roses and card.
You're welcome.
I'm going to miss her.
Do you think Ash will know that we stole his jacket after we broke into his locker?
I don't know, does anyone else know his combination?
I am not really sure, I thought he gave it to a few people.
Well than it's his fault for giving his combination out to so many people.
That is exactly what I was thinking too.
His loss, our gain, next time, keep it a secret!
Do you know anyone that would want to buy this jacket that I stole from Ash's locker?
Not many people I know will buy stolen goods.
Ash will never know that it was  me.  We know each other pretty well.  She will never expect it.
Even though she won't blame you, I don't know anyone that would buy it because it is stolen.
Well they don't have to know that.
That is true. What kind of jacket is it?
But I knew Ash well enough to know he had a jacket in his locker.
Oh, what did you do?
We broke into the locker and stole his jacket.
For a prank, or for real?
For a prank; I'm going to wear it in front of him and see if he notices.
That should be pretty funny.
I think i have done a great job for my company these past six months
have they even thought of giving you a raise yet?
i really hope they do or im thinking about leaving
dont work for a company that doesnt appreciate the work you do for them
that is pretty solid advice, thank you
My bosses took me out for lunch today. It was such a nice surprise.
How nice of them! What was the occasion?
They said they just wanted to show their appreciation for all my hard work.
That's great that they acknowledged all that you do. Doesn't always happen.
I know, this is the first job where I've ever felt truly valued.
Gee, I wonder if I'll ever find a job like that.
I have been with this company for such a long time
I know Jan you have made such a difference here for that very reason
Exactly.  I am glad people apprecite and value my hard work
You're not wrong.  Youve done a lot for everyone.  Even the CEO
Yeah.  Everyone is finally starting to appreciate me
You are correct
I bought gas earlier today.
Wasn't it 75% full though?
Yes, but we are going on a long road trip.
I guess, but couldn't you buy more down the road?
I don't want to stop, and anyway it's cheaper here.
I guess that makes sense.
I'm such a nervous driver that I filled up at the gas station even though it was already 75% full.
Why do you get afraid of running out of gas?
I wanted to drive to the state park and I don't know if there are fill stations on the way.
Oh, that makes sense I guess but I do think the park has a gas station too.
Oh, good because I am sure I'll fill up again once I leave there.
Yes, if you are that nervous about running out, I am sure you will.
I got an extra gas canister in the back seat.
Why do you take extra gas with you?
Gas prices are much lower in Binghamton compared to Buffalo so I wanted to get what I could before we left.
How much gas do you have now?
The tank is at 75% so I am good. It will likely take all of it to get to Buffalo and hopefully the extra gas will get us back.
Well, if not, you will have to buy the gas for the way back.
I just fill up for the road. I was down to three quarters.
There's no need to fill up right away.
I know but I am afraid of running out in case of an emergency.
You only work two miles away.
Rather be safe in case of the impending apocalypse?
Oh, I ignore those zombies. They are quite harmless.
I found out the blockade had affected the shipment
Oh! How were they able to eat?
I was able to supply the school with foods from the store
Oh! At normal price?
Yes!
You are so generous!
I could not believe that when I got there Aubrey was in that car drunk!
Oh no, did you have to drive him home?
No I didn't have time, I had to call his parents and have them come pick him up
What a mess, I hope he wasn't mad at you
It doesn't matter, he couldn't drive and he needed to get home
You made the right decision, I would have done the same thing
I had to call Aubrey's parents because she was so drunk.
Oh God. Have you talked to her since?
No, I'll wait for her to call me.
Okay, good. Just give her some time and space.
I saw Aubrey's car in the parking lot after we left the bowling alley, and when I looked inside she was in there.
What was she doing in her car?
She got really drunk, and couldn't drive home, but I couldn't just leave her there in the parking lot.
Yeah, that's not safe. Did you take her home?
I just called her parents. I can't deal with her when she's drunk like that.
She is a handful when she gets drunk. That was probably the best route.
I will be sending in my new address paperwork today.
Why did you need that again?
I need a new address because I am setting up a tax shelter.
Oh for sure. You need to explain this more.
Sure, I'll get a coffee and talk about it.
Sounds great.
I'm asking the government for a new address.
Why is that.
I want to set up a tax shelter.
That is interesting.
I think it will benefit me greatly.
Best of luck!
I hope I can get a new address
Do you think they will give you one just for a tax shelter
I would hope the government would give me one, I don't see why not
Well, hopefully everything works out for you and you get it
I had to write an entire petition to the government to get my paperwork going.
Why didn't you just hire a lawyer to do it?
I couldn't afford a lawyer and I thought it would be simple.
Was it complicated?
It was time consuming but hopefully it will work.
I hope it will be successful.
Oh snap! I was in the middle of the big bank robbery in downtown.
No way. Are you shaken up?
No, not at all but the dude stepped on my foot while fleeing.
So you saw him? You know what he looks like.
Yes, we made eye contact and he gave me a dirty look.
Well, I hope you have a good description to share. 
I was shaking a bit.  I just saw this robber with a black mask on pull a gun on the cashier.  I was right behind him.
That's frightening.  What happened?
The police showed up but the thief had taken off in a black SUV.
Did you give a description to the police?
They asked me what the person looked like.  I gave a description as best as I could. The person was masked, average built, and a couple of inches taller than me.  He spoke with a lisp.
That gives something for the police to go on.
Austin is in town.  He just flew in. I am going to pick him up from the airport.
How long has it been since you last saw him?
I would say three or four years.
That's quite a long time.
He's been out of the country fighting the good fight as part of the marines.
You guys have so much to catch up on.
The dogs seem happy now.
I think you did the right thing.
Amputating their deformed legs wasn't an easy decision.
Sometimes less is more.
I am worried about my dogs.
How are your dogs doing?
Well I took them to the vet yesterday.
What happened there?
I had to have their deformed legs amputated.
I am so sorry Remy! I know that must be so difficult for you and the dogs, but the main thing is that the dogs will be free of pain now.
We had the dog legs amputated yesterday.
Now they will be able to walk without being in pain.
We have to leave them at the vet for a week to heal.
You will probably need a ride to pick them up.
I need to get a wagon for my dog.
A wagon? Is your dog that lazy?
No, I had his legs amputated.
Wow, what was wrong with your dog's legs? That's terrible!
They were really deformed and causing him a lot of pain. My vet recommended he amputate them so the dog would be happier.
That's crazy. You should definitely get a wagon then.
I am never eating seafood ever again
Oh no. What happened?
I just kept eating it every day, but then I got really sick
Oh yeah, getting sick always makes you hate the food you had.
Yeah, it was partly my fault, but I just can't do it anymore
Well, give it a few weeks and you should try again
I'm never eating seafood again.
Seafood is so good, why stop?
I have been eating it every day for two months and it made me sick.
Too much of a good thing. How did it make you sick?
Food poisoning.
You need to make sure everything is cooked all the way, not just meat, but seafood too.
I felt like my stomach was going to explode!
What kid of seafood did you eat?
I had lobster stuffed with clams.
That literally made no sense.
That is what my stomach said!
Well, now you know to be careful.
Addison kept on squeezing my arm so tight. She was cutting off the circulation.
That forest is spooky and it's dark, I get it.
Nothing was going to happen. We didn't even seen an animal.
Just because we don't see anything doesn't mean something isn't there.
Wolves live in the forest. They are more scared of us, then we are of them.
If they are hungry enough, they could attack.
When we got to the really spooky part Addison held me tighter.
The entire forest is spooky. What part were you at?
We were near where the tree stump is. It is really spooky there.
What about where the trees hang down low?
That part is spooky too but not as spooky as where the tree stump is.
I just don't like it there.
This forest is really creepy so I kept holding onto Addison nice and tight.
I know Ash!
I wonder how many people have gotten lost in here?
Or worse! I think that forest was in a Cold Case Files episode.
Don't say that! I'm really scared.
Hey, everything went alright after all.
I'm back from work, what a day!
Did you remember to grab her phone before you left?
Ugh, no I forgot.
She really needed that!
I'm sorry, I promise I'll get it tomorrow.
Please do.
Publishing every book is so tiring. I'm worn out.
I feel you.
Yeah, work drains me.
Same here.
Business is really picking up for my photography company.
Really?  What happened?
At the gala last week I took a lot of pictures of Tracy giving her speech and accepting her reward, and I picked the best one and enhanced them.  Tracy bought every single one!
That's great, and I'm so proud of  you.
And now all Tracy's musician friends are making appointments with my studio to handle all their image work, too.
You're gonna be so famous!  If you need help around the studio, many would love to work there and study under you.
I got hired to take pictures of Tracy at her publicity event. My first professional job!
Congratulations! Maybe someday you'll be able to be a photographer full time.
I hope so. I selected the best ones and hopefully Tracy will buy them all. I could use the money.
I'm sure she'll like them. Maybe this gig will get you another.
I left some business cards with a few people I talked to so, maybe.
I feel really good volunteering at this cafe because they help people who really need food
It must be such a great place to work at and it has changed many lives
I think it has made me look at things from a different perspective
I hope they never go out of business because people depend on it so much
Hi Taylor what's wrong? You look like you've been crying.
Remy, can I tell you something?
Sure, Taylor. Shoot what is it?
I think I just killed my brother.
Oh My God! Wow! Are you sure he's dead?
He's right over there. And he's got no pulse. See for yourself.
I had the worst conversation of my life yesterday.
Here sit down, you look terrible, what happened.
Remember that kid Taylor from high school, I ran into him yesterday leaving the police station, balling his eyes out.
Man, what happened, he was a good kid.
He and his brother were struck by a drunk driver, he survived but his brother didn't and he was saying that it was his fault and he killed his brother.
That's so terrible, I am gonna reach out to the family and see what they need.
I am very thankful towards Bob as he is helping me so much.  I know he has been so busy in your personal life
I am sure he is glad that he can help you as much as you need.
He was such a big help.  I am totally thinking of giving him a promotion
There is a lot of stuff going on there
Yeah there really is and he was so helpful
Of course. He is great.
One of the guys on my team Bob is a really good worker. I am lucky to have him under me.
Does he know you appreciate him?
Yes. I took him to the side and told him I noticed how much he does and I appreciate it.
That was really nice of you. Was he pleased?
He was. And I'm happy he was because I can't afford to give him a raise.
That's not great.
Bob is a good employee.
I have noticed that in him.
I took him aside and told him I had noticed how hard he has been working lately.
That must have perked him up.
I added that I appreciate his effort at his job.
You've won yourself a loyal employee.
I spoke to Bob today.
Finally. What did you say?
I took him aside and told him I noticed how hard he has been working lately and made sure he knows I appreciate his effort.
That's good. He'll feel motivated to even work harder.
I was sorry to the group because I was so late.
What took you so long?
I couldn't find my uniform, so I had to search for a while.
Looks like you found it.
Yes, except one sock is still missing.
Oh, so your socks don't match.
I was at the amusement park with my friends yesterday and I got lost for a while.
Oh yeah? What happened?
I was lost for like 20 minutes and I didn't have my phone on me so I couldn't call them.
How did you find them?
I just bumped into them out of nowhere. They asked me what took me so long.
Well at least it all worked out in the end.
It was a weird ceremony.
What did you have to do?
I offered a tribute to the gods for reverence.
What's the point of all that?
It's so that we can get our wishes granted.
If I could get my wishes granted, I would offer much as tribute.
I went to church the other day.
That's nice, did you enjoy the sermon?
I did, thanks. I even offered tribute when they passed the plate around.
Why did you do that? I know you've been struggling with money lately.
I just couldn't help it. I felt such reverence that I felt compelled to give.
Oh Aubrey, you are so pious.
I've been feeling miserable since the meet yesterday.
I'm sorry. Did you fall off the balance beam or something?
Actually that's exactly what happened.
Did you get back up?
I did, but it didn't matter. I got a big deduction in my score, and I didn't place.
That's tough, but you're really talented. You'll win the next one.
I have been feeling down recently.
Why is that?
I lost a competition in a gymnastics meet.
Sorry to hear that.
Unfortunately, the lost made me feel worse.
Hopefully you feel better.
The gymnastics meet was this past weekend.
How did you do at the meet? Did you win.
I lost and tried so hard to beat her. I feel so bad about losing again.
If you keep practicing I know that you will win next time.
I don't think that I ever will.
You will win, you just have to keep practicing. I have faith in you.
It was tough today.  I lost my meet today in gymnastics.
I am sorry to hear that.
I had practiced so much.  It just wasn't my day.
You are such an athletic gymnast. I am sure you are disappointed.
I have to get back in the gym and keep practicing.
You'll get better and nail it next time.
I drove my friend home last night.  She was to drunk to drive.  I picked her up and parked her car.
That's nice of you.
I am usually the designated driver because I don't drink.
They can always count on you to be sober.
That's true.  I don't mind driving if that means all of my friends will make it home safety.
Drunk driving is such an issue when people are partying.
My friend needed me to come for her last night.
How come?
She was so drunk and thankfully called me.
You are such a good friend.
I went and picked her up in her parked car.
Good thing she didn't drive.
Remy was really nice.  He followed me home at night to make sure I was safe.  Once I made it home, he waved goodbye and went on his way.
That's very considerate of him.  Where did you meet up?
He's one of friends from my old school before I transferred.
You guys kept in touch, that's great.
I value his friendship.  He's an outstanding human.
That's nice.
I just got home. Remy is so sweet. He walked me home because he was concerned about my safety.
He is a nice guy. Is he still there?
No, he left as soon I was safely inside the house.
That's a nice friend. I wish I knew him better.
Remy walked me home last night after the fight.
He wanted to make sure you got home safe.
Yeah, we just talked and when he got to by street, he waved and went on his way.
You need to call him or get his some kind of thank you gift, to show how much you appreciated it.
I'm feeling a little better now. 
I'm glad you knew what you needed. I was at a loss.
If that ever happens again, I might lose consciousness.
Then what should I do?
If I'm still awake, get me to drink some cola or another sweet drink.
Okay. I think I need to do some research so I can help you.
Having diabetes is no fun at all.
How often do you have to take insulin?
It's only a couple times a day for me.
Do you miss eating all the foods that you loved?
I'm still able to eat some good food but in moderation.
Is moderation the portion sizes that they give you at fancy restaurant?
I am used to eating certain foods.
Do you always watch what you eat?
Well I have diabetes so I need to know what to eat to  bring my sugars up.
Is it hard to keep track of?
No you get used to it when you HAVE to do it.
Yeah, I guess if you do it all the time.
I got these snacks from my aunt who said they were really healthy
Those are good snack and they have protein in them too
I think that if I keep exercising and eating right I will feel better
Just try and take care of yourself the best you can and stay on track with what you're doing
I got a tutor to help me with my homework.
That's is very good. Is he good?
He says it is easy for him to explain things, and I have a hard time figuring things out.
Well, focus on the easy things first.
Yeah, that sounds like a pretty good idea.
You will get it eventually in the end
I was looking for Quinn but I had no idea where to pick her up.
Oh, she didn't tell you where?
She did, but I didn't see her message on time.
And what did she say?
She got a ride from another friend and apologized for the inconvenience. She didn't do it on purpose.
Okay, that's fine then.
I am so mad I drove all the way to Quinn's job for nothing!
Why was it for nothing?
Because by the time I had gotten there Quinn had already gotten another ride home.
Did she not tell you she had another ride planned?
No, she said that she forgot that I was already on the way.
That must have been very inconveniencing, I'm so sorry to hear that.
Hey, have you seen Quinn around?
Yeah, he got a ride home with a friend.
Oh shoot, I was supposed to take him home.
He left with John like 10 minutes ago.
Oh well, thanks for letting me know.
I was in front of Quinn's home to give them a ride, but she had already left with another friend.
At least they got a ride.
Yeah, I even offered to take them somewhere else.
And what did they say?
They said they were almost done with errands, so I told them I am available if they need another ride sometime.
That is very kind of you to offer.
I got everything set up for their surprise dinner and called them to the table.
What happened when you told them they were going to Disney world?
They all started screaming and yelling.
It is nice to be able to have dinner as a family and give them that news.
It was, with all the time they have been spending with their dad.
I've got to get dinner ready for the kids.
How nice to have a family dinner.
Let me call the kids.
They must be very obedient.
Depends if they're bored or not.  If they're involved in a game, it's tougher to get them to the table.
Well, I hope you have a nice dinner!
Finally, dinner is ready!  Kids, I've been working hard on this special dinner all afternoon so get your butts in here and eat!
What did you cook?
My kids love homemade lasagna so I made that, and I also hand-churned some homemade vanilla ice cream and I prepared a perfect seven-layer-salad that my daughter loves.
Wow, you went all in on this awesome dinner!
yeah, it's a special dinner because my daughter is leaving for college in two months and I want to feed her all her favorite things in the next couple of months, all made by hand from scratch.
Well, hey, you got lots to celebrate! Enjoy your family dinner!
I was lost.
You got lost?
No, I just don't know what to do with my life.
What can you do?
I am looking to Aubrey to give me direction.
He is not lost so good luck with that.
I talked to Aubrey today and I think she might be able to help me with my problems.
Why, what does she know that you don't?
I don't know. She just has a way of dealing with things that are negative. And things seem to work out for her.
It doesn't matter why...if it works, it works. Do it.
I will. I need a direction in my life. I feel like I'm running around in circles.
Give Aubrey a good chance...she might be able to help.
It was really fun to share my toys with the other children.
That's nice of you.
I was really happy to do it.
I bet the other kids loved it.
They did. They all became my friends.
I'm not surprised. You're a good friend.
My sister had a fun birthday party.
Did you play with the other kids?
Yes, I shared my toys with them.
Did you get all your toys back?
Yes, but one of the superheroes broke.
I hope your dad can superglue him back together.
I think my sister is mad at me.
Your sister is so calm and level-headed, she could never be mad at you.
But my friend broke her favorite toy, and she's blaming me.
How did your friend break the toy?
During my sister's birthday party, I shared all our toys with the other kids, and my friend took my sister's doll and snapped it in two.
Ouch, that must have hurt the doll.
After I slice up ham then I have to put it onto the scale to know how much I have.
What is it like using one of those deli slicers? They kind of scare me!
They are sharp and move quick, but as long as you are careful it is no big deal.
I can see why most people prefer an employee to do it for them.
I can understand that. Most people want employees to do it.
I am glad people are being cautious!
I am in the process of cutting up some ham at the deli, do you think my friends would like some
Yes, that sounds delicious!
Okay, let me get the scale and turn it one
Great! Do you use that to measure?
Yeah, I meaure the weight of the ham I cut
That's brilliant.
I love using the slicer at the deli.
It looks like a really cool tool.
Those things are very expensive.
Do you think they have one for home kitchen?
I'll have to look into that.
I'm doing a Google search on it right now.
I had to slice a lot of ham today.
How much?
4 pounds of ham!
That is a lot of ham.
It took a while, and at the end I had to give them 4.1 pounds.
That's more ham than they wanted, they must be happy.
I think I want to help more children.
That's great, how so?
I want to take on more patients, mostly children.
I think that is a good idea.
Yeah, I think so too, it would make me feel better about myself.
Good on you, that is a great idea.
I feel really lucky that I was adopted into a great home.
I know that not every child is so lucky.
I want to help as many people I can when I grow up.
How are you going to do that.
I want to become a doctor and help children.
That is a very noble goal.
I was aked today why I became a doctor.
And why is it?.
It wasn't money, unlike many others, for me it was my adoption.
What about your adoption?
Well since I was adopted, I feel like I have  an obligation to help out sick children.
You have such a huge heart and I am proud of you for that.
I think I want to be a doctor. I was adopted and I want to help children just like I was helped by my parents.
That is wonderful. Being a doctor is so important.
It is going to be tough because I need to raise my grades to be able to get into med school.
Yeah , and take the right classes. Make sure you get as much help as you can from the college.
I am going to do whatever it takes . I am totally inspired now.
I had so much fun today!
What did you do?
Sasha needed some me time, so she sent her two kids my way.  We spent the afternoon playing games.
You are good with kids.  I can see you having a large family when you finally decide to get married.
I certainly am getting plenty of practice with Sasha's kids.  It is a good thing that they like me.
What's not to like?
I played with sasha's kids today.
Yes, that's great.
We all met in the yard.
Did they bring their toys.
They did.
I bet it was a lot of fun.
These kids just love coming over here.
You're just too fun and they can't pass that up.
Maybe I need to find out what it is so I can use it on adults.
Good luck with that one.
Are you good with kids?
Yes, with the ones I know.
My kids are playing with Jesse today.
That sounds like fun.
Yes, they have such a good time there.
What are you going to do with your free time?
I don't know, maybe I could grab a bite to eat?
Sure. That's a good plan.
The winds were pretty bad but I thought the building would hold!
Was the foundation moving?
It was! We had to get out of there.
Did you hurry out of the building?
I did and we all met below the underpass
That's a relief.
We encountered a horrifying storm while we drove across the country in our car.
What did you do?
We didn't know what to do.  We came from mild weather.  My girlfriend and I don't know to survive in a storm.  We just know we had to stop driving.
It could be very dangerous to drive in a storm.  Where were you?
We were in a small town in Idaho.  We ended up spending the night with a nice family.
That's great you found some people who took you in.
The storm was pretty strong.
Yes!
We tried to stick it out through the storm.
Oops, it was a bad one!
It started winding stronger so we had to go then.
Yes, that was the smart choice.
That was a close call. That storm was stronger than I thought it was going to be.
I am glad you're okay!
I am glad we decided to leave.
I feel bad for the people who didn't leave.  I hope they are okay.
I missed everyone very much. I am happy they have all been doing well.
Where have you been?
I travelled abroad. I am just getting back for the festive season.
I's so nice to have you back. They really missed you.
It's been half a year since I left, I'm sure they can't wait to see you on Christmas day.
I can't wait either. I look forward to seeing everyone.
This is the last time I try to cook for anyone!
What happened?.
Well, I burned the meal and it's pretty much inedible now.
At least you didn't set anything else in the kitchen on fire.
Only the food!
I'm going to make dinner for us both.
That's great.
It will be ready in 10 minutes.
Sounds awesome, can't wait.
Sorry, I burned the food.
It's ok. You both can get take-out.
The others were saying some really mean things about me.
I know, they can be really cruel.
I don't think I look that bad.
Forget them, you are a beautiful person.
Thank you, you are very kind.
You deserve better.
I heard what they said and I wanted to tell Cameron it's not true.
I can't believe people are so mean.
I know. I hope he realizes they're just jealous because he is pretty and beautiful.
That's nice, I am sure he's hurt to be treated that way.
I know it does. He's been crying a lot.
You've been so kind.
I just left, I was losing by a lot of votes anyway.
It would have been better if you stayed.
Why should I, they clearly don't want me there.
But you should comfort your supporters.
Who is going to comfort me?
My heart is beating like crazy right now.
What happened?
I was too embarrassed to stick around for long after I realized the vote wasn't going my way.
I'm sorry you lost the election.
I really wanted to be elected president.
I know, but you'll have other opportunities.
Hey hey! Guess what's new with me?
Does it have anything to do with all that business research you've been doing the past few weeks?
Yes it does, I used that info to get a new job!
That's great! Does it pay better?
Oh yes, it's way higher pay.
Congratulations, you can pay for lunch next time!
I finally found my dream job! I am so excited.
It took you long enough to find something you would love to do.
I had to research carefully so I wouldn't fall into another job I hate.
And how's the pay?
It is so much more. Finally, I can do what I love, and have the money to travel.
Congratulations! You should go celebrate.
I wanted to do something with my friends today.
Like what?
Maybe a movie, or bowling.
What did you gus went with?
We didn't feel like bowling after all. The internet shows a movie at 11:15 and if we want really late there is one at 12:45
If you go to the first one, you guys can also get a snack after.
I wanted to introduce myself to Alex.
Why do you want to meet him?
I just think that he is really cute.
Looks aren't all that matters, you know.
They are all that matter to me.
Everyone is different.
When will I be introduced to Alex
Why are you so interested in meeting Alex?
Because he looks so good! I have been guiding him for quite a while.
Yes, sure is handsome, but he has a bad attitude.
Oh, what a turn off. Never mind, I am not interested anymore.
Good. You won't like him at all.
Alex was over there talking to Cindy, flirting.
Really?
He is in my homeroom class.
Do you like him?
Well, he is kinda cute.  I've wanted to meet him for a while.
Why don't you introduce yourself?
I just think Alex is the cutest boy i have ever seen
I thought you said Brian was the cutest boy last week
Well, I guess I changed my mind now that this guy's here
You wouldn't mind if a friend of yours talks to Brian, then?
They should go ahead!
This was one of the hardest decisions I have ever had to make in life.
I know it had to be difficult, I can't imagine my business going under and only being able to keep one person.
I never thought it would get to this, but my sister is the hardest working one out of everyone!
I know she is, I have seen her in action when she is working.
I just hope I made the right decision and no one is mad at me.
You made the best decision for you and your business!
Burglars broke into our house yesterday and held us at gunpoint.
That's terrible!
It sure was, they made me choose who would die, my sister or my cousin.
What did you do?
I chose to save my sister even though I cared about my cousin.
That must have been a horrible choice.
I need help figuring out what dances to do.
Why not check youtube?
I don't know what to search for.
You can search for cool new dances.
You think it will work?
Yes!  You can also try dances from different cultures.
So, the next school dance is coming up in three weeks.
That soon? Have you decided on a theme?
Yes, I am aware. I really can't think of anything creative.
A night under the sea? Beach bingo? Pirates?
Maybe something not so dramatic. Beach bingo might work.
But then kids will show up in bathing suits and I don't know how the faculty will feel about that.
Okay, we need some new fresh ideas for the dance next month, the old theme is getting boring!
Do you have any specific ideas or themes you want to go with?
I'm not feeling creative so I was hoping they could throw in some suggestions and help me out here
If they don't, you could do the classic fancy pants style, dress to the nines, all black and white, formal
Hmm I'm not sure this is the right age group for that but thanks for the idea
Makes sense, what about a themed era like the 80's, neon and net, so fun!
I told them I need some new ideas for the dance next week.  I needed suggestions.
What kind of dance is it?
It's the annual winter dance.  I just wanted something different this year.
You were telling me the band is amazing.  Maybe you can get them to play.
That's a great idea.  We could have a live concert with the band for the dance.
It would be good practice for the band too.
I need a new song for the performance, I've already done my favorite ones
What kind of music do they want?
It still needs to be jazz
Is new jazz ok?
Yeah that would be fine as long as it has that rhythm
How about some Louie Armstrong?
I told them we really should go to the beach.
I thought they wanted to go to the ski slope?
We cannot go there, the ski slope was shut down last month. I don't like skiing anyway.
But they did what you wanted to do last time!
Only because you did not want to go anywhere!
That is not true, they always want to go somewhere.
Ash and I went to the dance last night.
Oh,  yeah, I forgot about that! How did it go?
Great! It took Ash forever to get ready, you know how she is!
Yeah, she's like that!
But she was finally ready and looked great, so it was worth it!
Wonderful! I'm glad you had fun!
Ash looked beautiful when we went to the dance.
I am sure you looked great too.
I'm so happy I got to go to the dance with her.
What time did you have to be back?
I promised mom I'd be back by midnight.
Well you had enough time to have fun.
Oh no!  It's almost empty!
What is?
The cereal container is empty.  I am going to have to go to the store this morning to pick some up.  If I do not, we will never get through the week.
Do you have coupons?
No. I'm set, thanks.  I've gotta run  See you later.
Adios!
I hate having to go to the store for milk in the early morning.
Oh, did your family leave you an empty milk jug again?
Well it was almost empty. I am so sick of their selfish behavior.
You should start a house rule where the last person to use it must buy a new jug.
That's a good idea. I think I will put that rule into place.
It promotes selflessness and responsibility, so I think you will be pleased with the results.
Man this was a long time.
Long time?
Yeah, It's been 3 years since I saw Jordan's face again.
Why?
Cause I was on the other side of the country.
You could have video called each other.
I'm so excited because I got to see Jordan again last night.
Who is Jordan again?
He's that friend of mine that lived on the other end of the country.
Oh, yes, that guy.
Yes, I finally got to see his face again!
That's so cool!
It was really nice to see Jordan again.
Oh yeah, it's been a long time since you've seen each other.
I know, its been several years, I think about three?
That is a long time indeed.
We shouldn't wait that long to see each other again.
I agree you should see each other again soon.
The dog is frustrating me.
Give Prince a break.
No, I want him to get on the couch.
That's funny; most people want to keep the dog off the couch.
O.K., Prince, I'm just going to push you up.
That's one way of doing it.
I had to put the dog on the couch. He kept gnawing at the carpet. He's so weird.
What do you think is wrong with him? That is strange.
I don't know it's like he thinks it tastes good or is its chew toy or something.
Maybe you could take him to the vet to figure out what's wrong .
No, first I'll try the internet. It's cheaper.
I dislike the dog.
Dogs are so friendly. Why?
I am just tired of the dog behavior
Probably you didn't train it well.
Yes!Ii have to guide the dog more forcefully onto the couch
I think it needs proper training.
I recently joined a group study.
How was it?
It is a great group and I am glad to be a part of it.
I am sure they will love your personality and your ease.
I am enjoying everyone's company.
You are an asset to the group.
I think I blended well with the group earlier this morning.
That sounds great. What happened?
We had great conversations and it seems like everyone liked my personality.
That's nice.
Hopefully I get to see the group again.
Glad to hear you're doing well.
I just fit in with the group.  Everyone seems to love my personality and my ease.
You are just such as easy going person.
People tell me that, but I have my days.  I can get agitated and annoyed.
Everyone has those days.
You are right. I am pretty mellow.
That's why you have so many friends.  You are just pleasant to be around.
I met the group that composes the team for the project today.
Oh yeah. How did it go?
It went really well. We all have similar personalities and even though they are more experienced they said I seemed really comfortable, I fit right in.
That's good. You didn't feel overshadowed.
Not at all! I even felt comfortable enough to make a few jokes.
That's good, it sounds like you we're just one of the gang.
The train was so packed that I had to sit on Bailey's lap.
I bet you felt like a huge grown-up.
Oh yeah, definitely a grown-up seat.
Did you guys have a good time when you got to the park?
Yes, the game was great and saw the train ride was worth it.
Was the ride back as crowded as the ride there?
There wasn't enough seats so Bailey had to seat on my lap.
Were you comfortable with that?
Sure, she's my girlfriend.
Right!
My leg fell asleep though.
Oh, no!
So I had an interesting experience with Bailey today.
Oooh...I know how much she likes you. What did you end up doing with her?
It's kind of naughty, but it was born out of necessity. There weren't any more seats on the train, right?
Oh no...I know where this is heading.
So I sat on her lap. She jumped a bit but then put her hands around me. She was blushing the whole way!
Wow, well that's one way to heat things up. She probably liked your confidence...even if you had no other choice.
Rocky swallowed a sock the other day so I had to take him to the vet.
Is he all right?
Yeah they surgically removed it.
Did he go to the car willingly? I know how he hates the car.
He put up a fight but I eventually got him into the car.
Well as long as he's okay now.
I am planning on taking my dog to the vet in the morning.
Is the dog okay?
Yes. I just need to drive him there for a routine check-up.
You have so much compassion for that animal
This dog is part of my family.
I just put the dog in the car. He needs to go to the vet for a check-up.
Is there anything wrong or just routine?
No except his usual flea problem.
Well that's nice that he is healthy.
My poor puppy has a tummy issue again!
Oh no, again? That's the third time!
Fourth, actually. I didn't tell you about the other one. This time I knew she'd have to go to the vet right away. She needed meds!
Did she struggle to get in the car again?
Yeah, it was quite the ordeal. She was howling the whole way. I felt so bad.
Aww, poor dog. I hope she feels better after getting those meds.
Kendall kissed me on my neck when I was sleeping on my stomach at the beach yesterday.
Wow! Things are heating up between you two.
I don't know about that. He didn't know I was only half awake .
That's a little weird because you were sleeping.
Yeah , a bit creepy and inappropriate. What should I do?
Well you can start by saying you know what he did.
When I was sleeping on my stomach, Kendall kissed my neck.
That's sweet.
Kendall is a sweetie.
She's such a gentle soul.
She does a lot to help animals in the shelter.  She has the biggest heart.
You should marry her already.
I was hired by Casey to sell his home.
How is it going?
As a realtor I was successful at finding a buyer for the home.
Has the sale closed?
I worked closely with Casey and the house has been sold.
Congratulations.
I think I was able to get Casey a really good price and she will be happy
That is incredible, how much were you able to get in the end?
We finally settled on around 150,000 and I think both parties were happy in the end
I am glad that everything worked itself out and that everyone is happy
I told them to contact me if they need anything else.
Sasha has really high emotional intelligence.
Did you talk to her about your feelings?
Yeah, and she expressed them in perfect terms, she did a good job.
Yeah, she's good at what she does.
Sasha tried to write down how I was feeling based on my body language and she was pretty good at it.
Isn't she supposed to be working with the FBI as a body language expert or something?
Yeah and she is really good at it because she got my moods down perfectly.
So does she work to figure out if people are lying or not?
Yeah and it is really cool to see her do this as well.
I bet she notices things in people that the rest of us would never notice.
Have you heard any of Kendall's stories?
No. Are they any good.
Haha, not really, and they're all complete lies, too.
Well, most scary stories aren't true.
Are you sure about that?
Um, I think so?
My conscience is killing me, man.
Why, what happened?
So there was this girl at the bar that was trying to get in, I  could have swore she was about 19,  I let her in anyway. It was those eyes, those seductive eyes!
Like when my dog begs for an extra snack, it was those eyes those...
Let me stop you there, pal!
I was gonna say innocent...
I let Kai into the bar even though she's underage.
Were you the bouncer that night?
I was when Kai walked up with her friends.  All of her friends are of age.
So you actually card people.
Most of the time.
You're a good bouncer to know.
My friend tried their best at dinner.
How was it?
Well, it was a bit overdone.
Oh, that's not that bad.
It was black. Burnt. But it still tasted okay!
You're very nice to have eaten it anyway.
I had to use pepper spray at the park today!
What? Are you okay?
This creep was following me and trying to get me to go home with him.
That is awful, I am so sorry you had to go through that.
He wouldn't take no for an answer, so I had no other choice that to use my pepper spray.
You did well. For your safety, you should always carry it with you. You should also report it to the police.
There are going to fire me today, I just know it.
You don't know that, maybe they are calling you into the office to give you a promotion.
No, you didn't see the bosses face.
You need to think positive right now.
I'm so fed up with all of it.
You've really put up with a lot in the past few weeks.
I feel like I'm waiting for the other shoe to drop; just one more thing to happen.
What will you do if something else happens?
Then I'm out of here, I'm done with it all.
I don't blame you, but I hope things stay calm for you.
It's been such a hard summer with this coronavirus happening.
Yeah, it has been a very hard year indeed.
I was just waiting for the other shoe to drop and now my job is laying me off.
Oh, that really sucks!.
Okay, I need to look at my finances again.
This is a hard time for everyone so don't feel too bad.
I just bought a new pair of shoes.
Then why aren't you wearing it?
I already lost the right shoe coming up the hill.
I am sorry about that.
I am so upset that I am just ready to lose the other one.
Who knows, you might just find it later.
I am so proud of Skylar. She did really well on her test.
Tell Skylar I said Congratulations!
Thanks, I will tell her. I took her out for ice cream to celebrate. She loved it.
That sounds good. Now I'm craving an ice cream cone.
Skylar got a great grade on our math test.
What did she get? 
She got a 95! So I treated her to ice-cream. 
That is amazing, What did she choose?
She got a vanilla cone after school.
That sounds lovely.
I got in trouble today.
Why?
I ran away from Remy's mom and went to the toy section.
That sucks, were you trying to find the new Iron Man toy?
Yeah, I didn't find it, and I got grounded.
That sucks!
I was grounded.
What did you do?
I ran to the toy section when Remy's mom told me not to.
Did you see any good toys?
Yeah. There were some cool video games.
Well now is the time to try them out.
They won't find me, will they Johnny
Dont think so keep your head down and chin up
What does that mean, Why am i talking to you, you dont exist
I do for you Austin, you dont want to go back to the cage right?
No no no no
Just stay in the woods you will be fine
Being kidnapped was the scariest thing I have ever experienced.
I'm so glad you're safe and home.
Me too. You just can't be too careful with who you hang out with these days.
How did you escape.
After I broke the cage's lock, I ran to the woods and laid low until I came across some hunters who called the cops.
That sounds like such a harrowing tale.
I've checked everywhere for the remote and can't seem to find it.
Have you checked in the kitchen?
Ohhh! I've found it in the sink. Thanks!
You're welcome.
I searched my house high and low for the remote the other day.  You'll never guess where I found it.
By the tv?
Nope.  It was in the sink.
The sink?  How in the world did it get there?
I left it on the counter and the cat must have knocked it in.
Hopefully there wasn't water in the sink when it went in.
I asked Jesse if there was anything fun happening that weekend. I wanted get out of the house.
I don't think there is much going on.
That's what Jesse said.  It's a slow weekend.  We decided to have a pool party.
So fun.  Pretty time for a pool party.
We can have fun in the water.  It's been so hot lately.
I will be so fun.
I asked Jesse to come surfing with me this weekend.
What did he say?
He said he has never been, seemed a bit taken back.
You should teach him!
That's what I told him, and he agreed to come!
Have fun!
I really hope my old good friend comes here.
Here where?
To my party I just invited her.
Oh, its so nice to reconnect with old friends.
I invited a friend I hadn't seen in 15 years to the party and she actually came.
Wow. You guys must have had a lot to catch up on after 15 years.
We had a lot to catch up on, but I did not have a lot a time to talk since there were other party guests too.
That's too bad. You guys should try and keep in touch.
We are going to. We already set up a lunch date for this week.
That would be nice. You guys will have plenty of time to talk and catch up.
I finally broke out of my shell today and showed Taylor how much I like them.
Good for you! What did you do?
I stared into their eyes longingly...perhaps a bit too much, to be honest, but it seemed to work. I really do care for them and they needed to know.
How did Taylor react?
Well, Taylor smiled and returned my gaze...and then held my hand. I couldn't stop blushing! Maybe it'll lead to something, yeah?
I hope so. Would be nice to see you two together like that!
I feel so much affection towards Taylor, and sometimes it hard to show them.
What kinds of things do you do to show them you care?
I always love to look deep into their eyes. I feel so connected with them.
That's a good start. You should tell them what you feel when you look at them.
I know, but I get lost in their eyes and lose my confidence.
I'm sure Taylor would be happy to hear how you really feel.
I really hate Kai because he is always causing problems.
Is he that bad?
Yeah, he really gets on my nerves when he acts up.
Doing what he does all the time can't be funny anymore.
No, it really isn't and if he ever messes with me I'll punch him.
You might get a suspension if you hit him in the face.
I showed my parents my report card.
How did that go?
I was really excited and it paid off they loved it. I worked really hard this quarter.
You did good.
My parents were pretty excited when I showed them my report card.
It's always nice to have a report card that you can happily show your parents!
Very true!! I had 3 A's and 3 B's.
That's really good. You must be working hard at school.
I am. I like making myself and my parents proud.
Looks like you're being successful in that endeavour.
I'm trying to sort out which poems to include in my anthology for publication.
How are you deciding which poems to include?
I'm categorizing poems to determine which ones are related to the others.
Are you using any other criteria to decide?
Yes, I'm also considering how the poems would be helpful to my career.
That makes a lot of sense and I wish you the best with your publication.
I was happy to be able to restore Officer Jones to his prior position.
Oh. How did you come to that decision?
After my investigation, I found no wrongdoing so I was able to clear the officer and return them to their position.
I bet his was happy to hear that.
Yes, and I also was able to proceed with his raise and a vacation paid.
That is really nice for Jones. I am sure the vacation was a really nice touch. 
I am so glad that I woke up early and got here before everyone else
Did you see the monkey exhibit too?
I think I have seen every animal in there at least two times
I see you got your moneys worth then
Look what I got from the neighbor. They had to remove the tree so I told them I'd take it.
There are a lot of apples on the tree. Will you be picking them before you plant it?
It would make the tree lighter and easier to work with. I'll do that and I'll dig the hole after.
I didn't know trees grew fruit when they were that small. I thought it was only on big trees.
This tree will grow plenty of fruits
What kind of fruits does it bear
I'm not so sure but I know it will be full of fruits sometime soon
I should try a few when you pick them
Sure! And I will share with everyone.
I saw a lady throwing away a mango tree this morning when I was on my walk
Were the trees dead or damaged?
No, they looked great, it had huge mangos hanging from the branches!
Wow I wonder why she was throwing it away?
I have no idea, but I took one of the trees home to plant because it is full of fruit!
I would have too, enjoy those mangos
I decided to buy this apple tree and plant it in my yard.
Nice, will you give away some apples once they grow fully?
Of course, there's going to be so many apples on it.
Who doesn't like apples.
Apples are my favorite fruit, that is why I went with the apple tree.
Nice, I bet you won't get another one for double the apples though.
I was walking to work yesterday and wasn't looking at the sidewalk and fell
They really need to fix that large bump in Mr. Smith's sidewalk
I know people have reported it but the city never does anything
Typical city workers never fix what we pay them for.
Baby Aubrey look so cute in her swimsuit.
Babies are adorable.
She is the cutest, it's her first time in the pool.
I  bet she will like it.
She might get scared at first.
Yeah but wait a few minutes and she won't want to get out.
Isn't my baby Aubrey a cutie?
Cute as a bug.
I changed her into a swimsuit before we went into the swimming pool.
That sounds fun!
She pooped in the swimsuit.
I'm not changing that.
I decided I didn't like the name Bailey for my dog so I changed it.
What did you change it to?
Ranger. He just looks like a Ranger to me.
Did the name change confuse him?
No, he wasn't Bailey long enough to know that was his name.
That's good.  Ranger is a great name for a dog, by the way.
God what a horrible name for a dog. Bailey. Terrible
What's wrong with that name? It doesn't sound that bad.
It doesn't sound that good, either. Her name's no longer Bailey.
Oh boy, what did you change your dog's name to?
I changed it to Pickles. It has a better flow to it.
You named your dog Pickles? Hoo boy, that's a goofy name.
I don't know how to say this but I accidentally ran over Mrs. Beauty.
Oh no! what happened, is she alive?
She died, I'm so sorry, I was driving out and it seems like she was hiding under the wheel.
I'm so sad but I guess it wasn't your fault.
I feel terrible, I hope my neighbor can forgive me.
I get it, I just feel bad but there's nothing you could do.
I did something horrific this morning. I'm a horrible person.
You're not a horrible person. What happened?
I accidently ran over my neighbor's animal.
What? How did that happen?
He ran out from under the fence while I was driving out.
The cable channel that the game is on finally started working so we can watch it now.
What was wrong with the channel?
It was just a black screen for hours this morning and I thought we weren't going to be able to watch it.
It is a good thing it works otherwise you'd have to go to a bar.
I know, the bars around here charge to get in when there is a game too.
That's what I mean, thank god the channel came back on.
Today has been a great day.
Wonderful. Let me know about the details.
I had been looking forward to watching a game. And I was able to see the game live on my HDTV.
It must have been very exciting.
It was. The game was very entertaining. My team won too.
I'm glad you enjoyed it. Sports are always fun to watch.
I'm really looking forward to watching sports again after the long hiatus.
What game are you most pumped for?
The big Yankees game.
Are you going to watch it?
Yes, I took off work to watch it on TV.
Good thing your work schedule is so flexible.
I'm excited for the big game!
Where will you watch it?
My friend's house, they have a bigger tv!
Okay you should bring the pizza and wings
I'll be over there in 5 hours
Perfect timing
I think I've finally mastered a few magic card tricks!
I didn't know you were interested in magic.
I love everything about magic. I've been studying the cards first.
You'll have to show me some of your tricks someday.
Oh, I plan to. I want to show everyone my new skill!
I have developed an interest in magic.
That is a fun hobby.
I have been studying how to do magic with cards.
Those tricks are most entertaining.
With a little practice, I did the trick.
You are another Houdini.
My trick was a success at the party.
What trick?
I did a magic trick using cards that I had been studying.
That sounds fun. I didn't know you were studying magic.
Yes and it was a big hit with the crowd.
Well, I hope to see it one day.
I just miss getting that bird
It is a pity you missed the shot.
Once I missed I knew I was gonna have to wait a long time because I scared them
Everything was on, it was just bad luck.
I need to be an expert.
You could seek advice from experts.
I just shot down a bird I saw.
Wow. You are a good shot? I didn't even know.
Yeah, I just aimed and pulled the trigger. And it was dropping from the sky.
Those birds don't stand a chance against you
I will keep trying until I become the best.
I always brings drinks to the picnic!
what did you bring to the family picnic this time?
orange juice and lemonade
fruity this time? no soda?
no, we want to be more healthy
that's the way to go about it
I went for a picnic today
that sounds nice, who'd you go with?
just me and my family
oh nice
yeah, I brought some really tasty drinks
that's so nice
I had a good time at the family picnic.
Where did you go?
We went to the lake. I brought the drinks.
Did you go in the water?
I think Kendall is the perfect match for me.
Yeah, you guys would make a cute couple.
I took her out on a date last week.
Did it work out well?
Yes, when we got back to her place after dinner we relaxed and I tilted her head back to make my move.
Was there any chemistry in the kiss?
I just have been interested in her for so long.
I could tell.
I couldn't hide it any longer.
What did you do?
I kissed them and took them to my bedroom.
Well, I am happy for you.
Riley called me this afternoon.
Oh did she? How come?
We're working on a project and she wanted me to know the latest.
That was nice of her. What's the focus of the project?
We're studying the impact of droughts on cacti.
I'd guess cacti would be totally fine with no rain; I bet that's your outcome.
Tomorrow will be my first day of college.
Wow! are you nervous?
No, I am not nervous, but I can't relax.
Try to relax by taking long slow breaths.
Do you think engineering graphics will be a good college major?
Yes, I am sure you will enjoy it.
I have been so busy lately working on various projects.
What all are you working on right now?
I am about to start writing a new pilot, but I also have been helping Casey and her impressions.
That is really nice to help Casey when you have your own project to work on.
I don't mind helping her, it gives me extra practice and it looks good on my resume.
I am sure she appreciates the help.
I'm really nervous about this presentation I'm doing to show Casey.
What is it for?
I'm going to start working to write for a new pilot that's gonna air on tv.
If you have the job, why do you still need to do the presentation?
Because Remy wants to make sure that the writing can be filmed.
I hope Remy approves your work since I know it's going to be great.
Hey, how's it going? It's nice to hear a friendly voice. I don't hear one very often.
You've turned into a recluse, almost.
I know but I don't like being around people that much. I don't know many people anymore.
That's because you don't act like you like anyone. You argue with everyone.
I probably am a little too cynical but some people's ignorance just pushes my buttons.
Well, try to chill out a little. It's not worth fighting about every little thing.
I can't believe what that guy said to me, I was so mad I had to put my arms around his neck!
Did he try to stop you?
Well, I could tell he was showing signs of discomfort but I was so angry I did it anyway.
Wow, Remy, you should really consider seeing a therapist about your anger problems.
You're right, I have been dealing with anger problems since a child. It's time I get some help.
I'm glad you're interested in getting better, that's a great start.
I had to hold this guy down because I think he broke his neck
You must have been very careful.
I just needed to keep him from moving around too much so he didn't hurt himself
Next time put something soft under his head so he isn't in too much pain
I think Skylar's jealous of me.
What makes you say that?
She gave me bad advice the other day to make sure I didn't beat her. I think she sabotaged me.
At least now you know not to take Skylar's advise in the future.
This story of mine's been getting a lot of attention on the internet!
How many followers do you have now?
A lot! People are really enjoying reading it.
I'm glad you've finally found your audience.
I was so relieved to finally finish the story.
I'm glad you were the one who wrote it. You're talented.
Thanks. It turned out to be a lot more popular than I thought.
That's great. So it got good reactions?
Sure did. Got a whole bunch of new followers because of it.
Wow, you should be really proud of yourself.
I was so angry during traffic today.
What happened?
Someone cut in front of me!
That's crazy.
It was infuriating, I honked at him!
I hope you took the registration number and called the police.
Today a car just cut in front of me!
I hate that! What did you do?
I honked my horn.
Did the person in the other car do anything?
Yes, he gave me a really dirty look.
That person is the kind of driver that causes accidents.
Drivers these days are out of control. People drive like it is a deadly sport.
Yes, people drive like they're racing. Did anything happen?
Someone cut in front of me and made me honk at them!
You have to be careful out there! You could have an accident.
Yeah, I will. I don't want to be dealing with any road rage anytime soon.
That is very deadly.
I just went and told my boss about that co-worker who has pushing all her work onto me. She said it will most likely result in a demotion.
Good for you! She deserves it, it wasn't fair what she was doing.
I know. I was overworked as is, and she was just playing on her phone all day while I picked up the slack
Yeah, that's so not fair. I'm glad you told your boss.
Me too. It will be good for me to get a break.
For sure, you deserve it.
So I ended up getting one of my co-workers demoted.
How did that happen?
They were never doing their work on time and always passing it on to others.
I hate those types of people that can't pull their own weight.
Tell me about it, I complained to my boss and it was taken care of pretty soon after that.
Well I'm glad you spoke up. If you didn't they would have kept taking advantage of peoples' kindness.
I can't believe I found my dream home and it leaves me extra money for improvements.
Sounds like a dream. What work needs to be done?
I won't know until I get in it because everything about it is awesome.
I can't wait to see it.
I can take you by there today if you have time.
Sure I do. Lets go check this dream home out.
I found my dream house that is well under my planned budget!
Where is this house located?
Downtown San Francisco. It came with hardwood floors and professionally equiped kitchen and backyard pool and all for just $5 million.
I should come and visit very soon.
I would love that!
I found the perfect house.
Did you, where did you find it.
In downtown San Francisco, and the best part is that its under my budget.
How much does it cost?
It costs about $5 million.
That  is expensive but I guess you can afford it.
I couldn't afford a haircut the other day.
I see you didn't get one.
I tried to convince the stylist to give me one for free, for practice.
Why would she need to practice?
Well, my hair is unusually unruly, and the stylist could learn to deal with that type of hair.
Apparently your argument didn't work.
I had to ask my hairdresser for a free haircut earlier.
How come?.
I left my wallet at home.
You are so forgetful, did they give you a free haircut?
I am, sadly they didn't so I had to rebook.
Next time don't forget your wallet.
I heard from Aubrey.
Was that a recent call?
She was at a funeral yesterday and standing over a fresh casket when memories of me ran through her mind.
I hope she wasn't wishing you were dead, too.
You are not funny.
And you are not dead.
Aubrey went to view caskets for my father earlier.
That must have been hard for you both.
Yes, it was tough, Aubrey said she couldn't stop being reminded of me.
You and your father did look a lot alike.
Everyone always thought that.
Well, let me know if you ever need anything.
I'm really missing Aubrey these days.
Why's that? I thought the two of you had a falling out.
Yeah, but she told me that at our dad's funeral, she thought of her childhood memories of me while standing over the casket.
How did you respond to that?
I burst into tears. I feel badly about how our relationship turned out.
You should apologize to her and move on.
I feel bad for what I did today.
Why, what did you do wrong?
I gestured the middle finger to them.
How could you do that?
I know, right? I felt so bad. What kind of a mother am I?
You owe them an apology.
The police came calling at my door this morning
Are you OK, what happened?
As I was driving down the 4th street, someone blocked me and I pointed middle finger at him
But did that warrant him to call the cops on you?
No, he didn't call the cops, he was a cop!
Oh! damn, sorry about that
I feel horrible. I gave the kids the middle finger I was so angry.
That is pretty bad, but not the worst mother ever. Every parent has their limits.
The kids just were shocked. They never saw that side of me before.
You really should have a talk with them about it. It will help everyone to deal with the situation.
You are right. I don't want them scarred for life.
I really crossed the line today.  I am a horrible mother.
Why? What did you do?
I got so angry that I wasn't thinking straight. I flipped off my kids with my middle finger!
You aren't a terrible person. My anger has gotten the better of me before.
What should I do now?
Sit them down and talk to them about why you felt that way and why your actions were inappropriate.
I just took the train to Seattle. It was so much fun.
What did you do there?
All the tourist stuff, I saw The Space Needle and Pike Place Market.
Sounds fun.
I visited a friend, so I got to just hang out with her, too.
That's my favourite kind of trip.
I took the train to Chicago this weekend.
I've never been on the train. What's it like?
It's like the bus, only better. I had my own compartment. I had fun seeing the sights.
I really like road trips.
And you would like being on the train. It's like a moving Hotel.
I had never thought of it that way.
Carson is terrible at work!
Why, what's wrong?
He was under the house working on the air conditioning and he forget to bring his tools.
Was he just pretending to work then?
I don't know, he asked me to grab them for him as usual.
You should be used to this.
Carson asked me to grab his tools for him so he can fix the air conditioning.
It's been so hot the past few days.
We are in the middle of summer now so I expect it to be scorching for many days to come.
Did Carson fix the AC?
He did. He worked on it for an hour and now my AC is working.
At least you don't have to suffer in the heat.
Have you seen the wrench and the screwdriver set?
No I have it, are you fixing something?
No, Carson is fixing the AC and forgot to grab them before he went under the house.
Your AC is under the house?
Yeah, that was a shocker to me too.
I'll help you look for them.
I was so happy Carson decided to go under the house to work on the air conditioning!
I bet. How did it go?
It was kind of funny, actually. He was already under the house and forgot his tools!
So he had to come back up to grab them?
No, he asked me to do it. I was close by.
Oh, good. It's so much better that he didn't have to go all the way back into the house to get them.
Do you want to come to my concert tonight?
Sure, will it be a solo flute recital?
No, tonight I'm playing the tuba.
Wow, I didn't know that you also played tuba!
Yeah, I can play all kinds of jazz and marching band tunes.
Very cool! You're a multi-talented person.
I love playing musical instruments.
Really? what instruments do you play?
I play mostly the flute but I also play the Tuba.
That is amazing, are you good?
Others tell me I am and I put a lot of passion into it so I guess I am.
You should play me a song sometime.
I got so mad at my boss. I sent him an email and he just ignored it.
You're kidding? Why would he do that?
I didn't know but I confronted him and he had no idea what I was talking about.
He didn't get the email?
I checked my email again and found I sent it to the wrong address. So embarrassing.
I wonder what happened to my email.
When did you send it to?
My boss. But he claimed he didn't receive any email from me.
Maybe you mistyped his email address or your system could be down.
I guess that's possible. I'm just send it to him later.
Or you can just print it and send it over through the messenger.
I had sent an email with the last part of the project that I completed. Then I got sick and didn't really follow up with him.
Did he receive it?
That's the problem. He didn't. I was too sick to realize that.
Are you in trouble?
Sort of. The client is really mad because he thinks we just don't care.
What can you do?
I am getting so tired of my cubemate Kai.
What happened now?
He keeps moving his items onto my desk. I asked him about it and he got indignant.
Wow. Pretty gutsy to take people's space and get mad about them saying something about it.
I didn't say a word to him for the rest of the day.
Do you think he noticed?
I am not speaking to Kai all day because he is rude.
What happened between you two?
He said I didn't help on a project when he knows I was dealing with stuff at home all week.
Did you explain that to him?
Yes but he did not seem to care, he only cares about work.
Well then just worry about yourself and he will get over it.
I can't believe my dad is getting married again.
What is his girlfriend's name again?
Her name is Anna, and I don't like her.
You probably don't like her because she's not your mom.
That's probably true.
I don't remember you actually saying anything bad that she's done.
I am so happy for my dad, he finally proposed to Anna.
Wow that's wonderful, haven't they been together for years?
Yes, they've been in love for five years, and finally he pulled the trigger.
I am assuming she was excited? I would feel a little impatient.
They had some money issues and that's why he waited so long. She knew they were going to get married but they needed to work through the problems first.
That makes sense. Don't want to get married with a lot of debt. Congratulations to them!
I actually changed  my sheets twice in a month.
Look at you go. Are they finally clean?
You know that I have had to wash them a few times to get some of the stains to finally go away.
That is kind of gross. I don't need to know that.
I played with Jordan all day.
Doesn't have school work and house work to do?
Yeah, but I was bored and wanted to hang out.
You can't do that all the time.
Why not?
Because he has other responsibilities.
I drew Lee's analogy.
How did you find the result?
I wasn't really pleased on Lee's input.
Did you tell him?
I already confronted him.
I hope things get better between the two of you.
So Lee wanted me to draw his analogy for him.?
Really?
I asked him for some help with it too.
Did he help at all?
No, I wasn't very pleased with his input.
Next time Lee should just draw it himself.
He really loved the dinner.
Oh, what did you serve him?
I treated him to a giant steak with a side of mashed potatoes.
That sounds delicious.
It was!
That's good.
My son did such a good job with his presentation, I made his favourite dinner for him.
Awesome, he is a really good boy, what did you make for dinner?
I seared a huge steak and made his favourite mashed potatoes with garlic and butter.
Oh that sounds good! I bet he was happy to see that!
He was indeed and let me tell you, he ate every bite of that steak!
I bet he was stuffed afterwards!
My son got a good report card.
Oh yeah? Are you doing anything to celebrate?
Yes, I made a dinner, we had a giant steak and a side of mashed potatoes.
That seems like a great reward.
Yes, he really loved it!
I would too! You should make it for me sometime.
Getting straight A's can really pay off!
How much money did you get?
I didn't want money, I wanted a Porterhouse steak dinner with my mom's homemade mashed potatoes and corn on the cob.
That sounds really good right now!
I got to go to the butcher and pick out my own steak so I picked the biggest one they had.
Knowing you the only thing left was the bone!
I was so embarrassed as I was caught stealing!
Why didn't you use a mask or something?
I had to cover my face with my hands.
That's not very wise my friend.
It's not going to happen again.
I hope it doesn't.
I only did it as a dare!
I told you to stay away from that girl, she would get you in trouble.
I was so embarrassed when the security guard asked me what I had, I put my hands over my face, trying to hide from the people taking pictures.
I will be there in 30 minutes to bail you out, but you have to repay me the money.
I almost went through with the deal buying the car.
Oh, yeah? How much was the final negotiated price?
It was over $30,000 and exceeded my budget. I didn't buy it after all.
How much do you really need a new car?
I don't really need a new one for another five years.
Yeah, you've had your current car for less than ten years anyway.
You know what give me my deposit back.
We were just about the to sign, the car is almost all yours.
I just got a text from my brother the car is listed for five thousand less down the block.
That's impossible, I can maybe take of two hundred.
No just give me my deposit now.
Let me go and get it.
You know what, I think this car is too expensive for me.
How about we find you a less expensive car on the lot then?
I think I will pass today, on second thought I should save more money.
Feel free to come back when you are ready sir.
I will, thank you for your time here today.
No problem at all.
I'm in an elevator.
Oh where are you?
I'm in a building downtown. I have a job interview.
Oh good luck with that! What company is it?
It's with Rolling Stone magazine. They're on the fourth floor of the Thompson building. I just pressed the button and am heading up, so I'll talk to you after.
Okay, you've got this!
I have to go to the 4th floor for my job interview.
I work on the second. Meet me there at 11:30 and we'll go to lunch.
I'm really nervous.
Good luck. That's a great company and you'd be a great employee.
Thanks! I'll see you for lunch. Maybe that sushi bar around the corner.
I get off here. See you later.
I just got and hung a new picture.
Oh nice, are you trying to give a new look to your place?
Yes, this new picture is relaxing and nice
Great, that kind of pictures helps to feels like home.
Exactly.
Nice, enjoy the new look.
This picture, it relaxes me so much.
What is the picture of.
It's a seaside painting.
Yeah, that sounds very peaceful.
I like to lay down and look at it.
I'd like to see it one day.
I just have to put this picture on the wall.
It is very relaxing.
Yes, it really calms and soothes me.
It's a great picture.
I secretly put Austin's father's brother in  model train contest. He'd never do it because he is too shy, but I know he's going to win because his is amazing.
I saw the train set once. It was definitely impressive. What do you think he will say?
I hope he'll be happy if he wins. If not, I will try to keep it from him.
It's good for him to feel proud of himself for accomplishing something.
I entered Austin's father's brother into a model train contest.
I had no idea his uncle was even into that.
Yeah, he is. He has a huge model train in his basement.
Why didn't he enter himself into the contest?
He's very shy. So I figured I'd do it to surprise him since I think he can win it.
He should share the prize with you if he wins it.
I'm in so much trouble with my parents after this weekend.
Why, what happened this weekend?
I forgot you weren't there! We had a crazy party while you were on your trip, and the cops showed up.
No kidding? Wow, I kind of feel left out, but I guess it's better I wasn't there.
Yeah, my parents were so mad when they got home. I'm grounded for months.
Hopefully they let you off early. That stinks.
I wasn't sure which dress to wear to the wedding so I bought both.
Why would you buy two dresses that are so similar?
Because I couldn't decide and was wasting so much time in the store.
Well which one do you like most?
I told you I like both of them. I will return the one I don't wear.
Isn't that more wasted time?
I need to know my next move.
You have so many options that you need to look at.
That is where the problem lies.
You do not have to decide now anyway.
I will make my decision soon but not at this moment.
Yes just keep it open until you have reviewed every detail.
So I had this interviewee that was suppose to come in for an interview. But he never showed.
What happen with that?
We had to give the job to someone else, its sad though because on paper this guy looked good.
Man that must suck for that guy talk about missing opportunities.
If you want a job you better be on time!
I do kind of feel guilty for what I did.
You told them the wrong answers?
Yeah, I just wanted to be the best student in the class.
Did they get bad test scores?
They did. But they could have looked up the answers themselves instead of just listening to me!
I'm sure they won't listen to you again.
I got the best grade on the test.
I guess that means you're the best student.
I am, but I feel guilty about it.
Did you sabotage the other children?
Yes, I gave them the wrong answers to the test which affected their grades.
I don't think you can be the best student unless you start acting more honestly.
I want to be the best student.
That is a nice goal Jordan.
So I told my classmates the incorrect answers to the test.
Well, you are the worst Jordan, you may affect their grades.
Yes, I know but I really want to be the best student.
I will tell the teacher what you did.
I think I did a bad thing today in class.
Did you put fake vomit in the teachers desk again.
No, that was funny though, I told my class at recess that I got hold of the answers for the test and  gave them the wrong answers for the test on purpose.
Well, they shouldn't have been asking, that's cheating.
But I told them so I would get the highest grade and be the best student in class.
That's a pretty mean thing to do, now they all got bad grades.
I can't believe how much my medications are. This crap is ridiculous.
Can I ask how much they are?
Sure, it's $450 for a 90 day supply. And that's after my insurance pays the rest.
That's nuts. They need to stop these pharmaceutical companies.
Yeah, but they won't.
I don't know how I'm going to pay for the medicine I need.
Is it really important?
I have a life-threatening illness.
I'm so sorry to hear that.
Thank you. The medicine is just too expensive.
I can start a fund for you if you want.
I feel blessed to have money to afford medical care.
It's sad you need to have money just to live.
Yeah, my condition is life-threatening, and the medicine is expensive.
Did you have to pay out of pocket?
No, but the insurance will only cover so much.
Is this a brand or generic medicine?
I am so happy that Addison came to visit me after I gave birth.
I'm so proud of you Tracy. The miracle of child birth is such a joy.
I know. I am so lucky to have a beautiful baby girl and some great friends.
Yes. she is beautiful. We will all love her. Everyone in the neighbourhood sends there love.
Addison gave me such a great hug afterwards too.
That is so lovely of her!
I was so glad that Addison came by.
I can't wait to come by to see you guys.
Just let me know when and I'll put you on the list.
I'm also glad everybody's healthy.
Thanks, that's the number one concern.
Do you want me to bring anything?
Want to go somewhere to eat?
Sure, what do you have in mind?
I think a restaurant would be nice.
Are you going to eat a lot?
No, I think I'll just have a medium amount of food.
That's a good idea, too much food isn't good.
You know, I skipped breakfast, and I am starving.
Let's stop on the way to the office and get a great big steak.
I think that sounds like a great idea, but I want something smaller like a nice New York Strip.
Fine with me, as long as there's beer!
Well, I don't see what harm one beer can cause!
Yeah! Let's not get hammered for our business lunch today!
I was so hungry I got the medium sized value meal at that restaurant.
Normally you eat like a bird. You must have been hungry.
I hiked all day at the park. So I was ready for food.
I hope it was good. You need to put on weight.
Thanks, I will take a grill cheese sandwich cut the crust off and a minestrone.
Okay, what about a drink?
A cup of Chia tea?
Okay, and any dessert?
No thank you, but I'll take a whole pork roast with yams and broccoli, steak fritters, chicken wings, cornbread, throw in a slab of chocolate cake, and apple pie all for the road.
You got it!
I'm glad we decided to eat here.
Are you hungry?
Pretty hungry, maybe I'll get a medium sized meal.
That sounds right to me, I think I'll get the chicken.
I'm going for the sandwich.
That sounds good too.
I freaked out when I saw Aubrey's about to swallow a toy!
What happened?
I realized that Aubrey's mouth was full so I went over to her.
Did he swallow the toy?
No, I opened Aubrey's mouth and got the small toy out before he swallowed it.
Thank God you were there.
Ugh I hate babysitting for the Henderson's! Aubrey is such a pain.
Why, what happened this time?
She always tries to eat her toys. This morning she ate a toy car and I had to pry it out of her mouth.
Yikes that's scary. Why does she have such small toys?
Well she's old enough that she shouldn't be doing that. But I've told her parents before that she puts stuff in her mouth and they don't seem to be concerned.
How careless.
I had turned my back on Aubrey and within a couple of seconds he had a little toy in his mouth.
Were you able to get it out?
Yes, I got him to open his mouth for me and I got it before he swallowed it.
Kids! You can't turn your back on them for a second.
Definitely. I'm going to be more careful about the size of the toys I let him play with.
Right. If it doesn't fit in his mouth, no risk of him swallowing it!
Austin owes my brother money for something.
What does he owe them money for?
I think it's for drugs, he hasn't paid his debts.
How do you know?
My brother came over to his and asked him to pay up, but Austin turned them away.
He needs to sort this situation out.
My brother has been causing problems lately.
What's your brother doing?
He went to Austin for drug money.
What did Austin do?
Austin turned him away.
That's a good move by Austin.
I told Lee lies about my past.
Why?
I was afraid he would judge me.
It's not good to lie to your friends.
I know.
Lee told me he is very mad at you!
Lee caught me in a lie today and he's really mad at me.
Why are you lying to him?
I didn't want him to know about my criminal past. Some people can't get past it.
Some people can't be friends with a liar either.
Yes, I've learned that the hard way.
Me and Bailey aren't friends anymore.
Why, what happened?
I wasn't being a real friend and I betrayed him.
Was he upset?
Yes, he said he was so defeated he just had to accept defeat.
Well I hope you guys can fix things, you have been friends for a very long time.
I was so nervous before giving the speech.
I couldn't tell, you aced that speech. Everyone was talking about.
I could not have done it without you giving me the speech lessons.
You put in the work, it was my pleasure.
My friends convinced me to go watch the scariest movie with them.
You don't like horror.
I hid behind the seat in front of my most of the movie. There was so much screaming in the movie.
You survived it.
By the time the movie ended, I was so stressed out. I told my friends I need to go home and put on a Disney animation just to clear my mind.
Restore the peace.
I let my friend convince me to see a scary movie even though I don't like horror.
How was the movie?
Far too scary for me.
I am sorry to hear that.
I want eggs for breakfast.
What do you want to eat?
I'm thinking eggs inside the toast.
That is so good.
Yes, you need it with bacon.
Yes, super southern food.
I had such a hankering for eggs this morning.
Yummy, that's my favourite thing to eat for breakfast.
Then you would really love the egg bread toast that I make.
Sounds delicious. When can I try it?
How about tomorrow morning? Does that work for you?
It definitely does. I'll be here at 8:00 AM and I'll have my appetite with me.
I had such a craving this morning for eggs, I just had to have some.
I get cravings sometimes myself, what did you do about it?
I hard fried an egg and had one piece of toast and one piece of bread and made a sandwich.
Toast and bread for a sandwich? That sure is different.
Yes my mom used to make it that way.
I guess that would save time and electricity toasting less bread.
Hey, I want some eggs for breakfast. Do you have any ideas?
How about bacon and eggs?
No, too messy.
OK, maybe an omelette?
That's too much work. Maybe I'll just make some egg bread toast.
Sounds like a plan.
I've really been trying to eat eggs lately for breakfast.
How do you like to eat them?
On top of bread preferably.
Do you toast the bread or just leave it soft?
I like to toast the bread so it's nice and crispy.
That sounds like a good healthy and light breakfast to me.
I had the most difficult assignment.
Is this about Alex?
I stayed with him until he died.
You did the right thing.
I was there to cover his body and I was so sad.
I am sad as well.
I'm so happy that I finally have some time to arrange things around here.
You're quite the neat freak aren't you.
Well, yes, but you know, an organized work environment makes for an organized mind.
You're such a goody two shoes.
You bet! Now that my files are all in order, I'm going to be twice as productive.
That's great Sydney. Keep it up.
I finally got my office space organized.
Wow! It looks great.
I spent the whole morning arranging the desk and ordering the files.
Everything looks colour coded and put in alphabetical order. It's a huge improvement!
I rearranged my whole desk today, even the files are put away.
That must have been a big job since I know you had a lot of paper.
I did but I was able to organize the files a new way and now they are in big file drawers instead of on the desk.
Does it look and feel cleaner now?
It feels more refreshing to see a bare desk, actually.
Good, now you have space for some pictures and plants.
I got so sick of my desk and never being able to find anything.
It looks really organized now. You must have spent some time doing it.
Yes, I figured I'd make a one-time investment and really go over it.
I think I might do the same thing. You're rubbing off on me.
You won't be sorry. I have all my files put away and now I can find everything quickly.
I'm out of here. I'm going to go do my own desk instead of watching you work.
I finally got Kendall to change her mind about how she felt about our friend.
Was it easy to get her to change her mind?
No, not really. Kendall is very hard-headed sometimes.
How did you get her to change her mind then?
I tried to keep talking to her and eventually she came around.
You must be pretty persuasive.
I finally got Kendall to change her mind.
What did she change her mind about?.
How she felt about our mutual friend.
Wow, that must've taken a lot of persuading.
Yes, it took a long time but she finally changed her mind.
That's great!
Last week I decided that I want to learn how to make lots of different Chinese food.
Really? I didn't know you liked to cook. Did you sign up for a Chinese cooking class?
No, I just went to the library and looked for a book.
Did you get the book you were searching for?
No, it was a really specific book and the library doesn't have a copy.  Would you like to go to the bookstore with me and see if we can find a copy there?
Sure, I would love to. Even if we can't find that certain title, maybe we can find a different one you would like to get.
I went to the library to check out some books today.
What kind of books did you check out?
I checked out a bunch of Chinese cookbooks.
Are you trying to cook some Chinese food?
That's exactly what I'm trying to do, want to taste test my first meal?
Sure you're a pretty good cook so I'm sure it's going to be delicious.
I've really been getting into cooking lately.
What kind of cooking?
All sorts, I'm looking to learn about Chinese food next.
Do you have any cookbooks for that.
Nope, I'm headed to the library to find some though.
Nice, looking forward to hearing how it turns out.
I'm making lasagne for dinner if you want to come over.
I thought you were out of tomato sauce.
I sent my son to the store to pick some up. I'm a bit worried because it's the first time he's gone shopping alone!
No kidding! I'm sure he'll be fine.
Let's see if he remembers to get everything on the list.
I'm sure he will do great!
I just sent my son to the grocery store by himself.
I was wondering where he was.
I thought it was time for him how to learn how to shop for the first time.
You're not worried he might buy the wrong things?
I told him that if he didn't get what was on the list, I would deduct it from his allowance.
I get the feeling he's going to do a good job.
Alex would lose his head if it wasn't connected to his neck.
I have to hear this one.
The library called and said they had Alex's wallet.
That was very kind of them.
When I got it back from the library they showed me where he accidentally left it on the table.
Maybe he could hook his wallet to a chain and then hook the chain to his belt but he still might lose the chain.
This sauce is way too strong.
What do you mean?
It is too potent, the sauce on this pasta.
Water it down!
That isn't a bad idea, I will add some water.
Just don't add too much.
I'm ashamed of something that I did the other night.
Oh, no. What did you do?
Yes. Remember when we went to Lee's birthday party and you guys got so drunk that you passed out?
Yeah. We had a great time but my head hurt so bad the next day!
Well, Lee's girlfriend got mad and wanted to go home, so I gave her a ride. I pretended to be interested in her situation but really I just wanted to hit on her and see if I had a chance. I feel bad because Lee is my friend.
Yeah, that's not very cool. You should tell Lee what happened and ask him to forgive you.
Do you who Lee's girlfriend is?
Yeah, she's super cute.
I know, she's too good for Lee so I'm trying to get with her.
How's that working out for you?
I gave her a ride home from the party last night and she gave me her cell number.
Nice dude, sounds like you're working your magic.
Thanks to Carson's diet program I have lost some weight!.
Wow so it's working?
Yes, I've lost 10 pounds in total.
In one week? That's amazing.
Yes, I am already feeling better too.
That's great news.
Carson's diet is really working.
I see you lost 10 pounds fast.
Yeah, its only been one week too.
That's fantastic.
I just had the best lunch and it was free!
That's great. How did you get a free lunch?
My friends work at the restaurant and they always give me free food when I stop by.
So that means the rest of us are paying for your lunch?
I never looked at it like that before.
There is no such thing as a free lunch. Someone has to pay for it.
I just got back from the restaurant where Kip and Shonda work.
I know Shonda but not Kip. What restaurant do they work at?
They work at that place that looks like a 50's diner. They have delicious food.
Oh, I know which one you're talking about. I've never been there, though.
I went there because I'm totally broke. I don't have any food so they gave me a freebie meal.
That was nice of them. I'm broke, too. I get paid tomorrow, though, if you need some money.
I went to my friends' restaurant today for some free food.
They give you free food?
Yeah, when I go there, I know I'm getting a free dinner.
Don't you think you should just pay for your food once in a while.
If I'm going to pay for food, it's not going to be at that place. The food is horrible.
Maybe that's why they're giving it out for free.
I think I forgot to lock the door.
I saw you put the key in the lock.
Are you sure?
You've been really forgetful lately.
Now I'm going be late for work.
I'll double check it for you.
I went back home.
Why?
To double check if my door was locked.
I guess it was?
Yes, it was.
Okay
I wonder if I locked the door to the house?
What's that Quinn?
Oh, just thinking out loud. I may have left my house unlocked.
There's a lot of crime in this neighbourhood. You have to go back and make sure or else find all your stuff gone.
Are you sure?
Yes I'll cover for you if anyone asks.
I have been tutoring Austin recently and he is really improving.
That's great news because I know he was stressed by how much trouble he had been having.
The other day I glanced over to see if his answer was right and he was so happy to see me give the signal that he was on the right track.
I bet. Poor guy has been having so much trouble with that work.
It can be tricky, but I showed him some tips and pointers and it really seems to have made a difference.
I am sure his mom is going to be happy too when she sees his grades going up!
Austin was unsure about what to do with a problem at work. He made a suggestion, being a senior member at the firm, I confirmed that he was correct.
That's great. It's good to have subordinates that are actually competent and don't need constant handholding.
I know, but we've gone through high turnover lately. I always try to take a more hands-off approach and let employees try to talk themselves through it.
That's a good idea. Too bad most of the employees I have are not smart enough to do that.
I think Austin was actually right about the angle of the square.
I looked over the question about three times and I am pretty sure he is right about it too.
It's a pretty good indication that all three sides add up to a positive number.
Good, we can turn in the finished project now and get a good grade.
I really hope so.
Austin looks like he is on the right track.
That is great.
His work is good, and he didn't make any mistakes.
His hours of studying have finally paid off!
I was impressed with the article that Sydney wrote about me.
I read it and was impressed with all the small details she put in about your charity.
She captured everything I told her and put into her style of words.
You are lucky you found someone who understood what you were saying and did not take it out of context.
Sydney is good at explaining!
I learnt she is a teacher!
Yes! She wrote an article.
Have you gone through the article?
Yes! She gave the reader thorough analysis of my work diligently.
Wow! good
Mr. Olson asked our class what the bonus question answer was and nobody knew it but me.
Nobody knew it from my class, either! How did you know it?
I read it in a footnote at the end of the chapter. So he had me get up and write it on the board.
Well that's cool, I bet you got some extra points from him.
I hope so! I need the points in that class.
Yeah, that class is killing me too. I wish I would have read that footnote.
I thought I know the answer to the question but I didn't think the rest of classroom did.
Did you tell the teacher you knew the answer?
Yes, the teacher made me go and write it up on the board.
That's great.
I told the teacher that I know the answer.
That's great Jesse, were you the only one?.
No one else knew the answer.
What did you do?
I had to write it on the board.
Hey there! How was your weekend?
It was fine, thanks. How about yours?
Oh, man. You wouldn't believe what I had to do!
What is it?
I had to go to this play. It was so boring. But my wife wanted me to.
You should probably do things your wife wants you to. Sorry you had a bad time.
I had to take my wife to that play on Broadway everyone is talking about.
How was it?
I thought it was boring. I started to fall asleep.
Did your wife like it?
Yes and I don't get it. I think it was more for women because it was a romance.
Well at least she got to see it.
I had to oblige my wife the other night.
Oh yeah, what did you have to do?
I had to go to a play that my wife had been looking forward to.
Well that's good husband behaviour.
Yes thanks, it sure was boring though.
Sometimes we all have to make personal sacrifices for our partners happiness.
Thank goodness for Kendall, She made the past year tolerable.
What did she do?
Kendall quit her job and took care of me at home.
That is amazing of her, not many people would quit and take care of someone else.
Yes, I am forever grateful.
It was so hot today! I decided to go to the pool.
Yes, it definitely was hot. Did you go to the pool by yourself?
No, Riley came with me. We had fun.
That's good. What did you and Riley do at the pool?
Riley decided to dip my head in the pool to help cool me down. After that, we swam.
I hope you didn't mind Riley dipping your head in the pool!
Riley took my head in his hands and just dip it in the pool. It felt amazing. I was heating up from the sun.
That's sounds so refreshing. I want to jump into the pool.
I was at my friend's house and he has a pool in the backyard so we all striped down to our swimming trunks and dived in.
Does he have a diving board?
He does. He's on the diving team so he had one of the ones that is high up. It must be like 10 feet above ground.
You guys must have had a blast.
I want my dog to learn tricks.
You should let Jan teach it how to do tricks then!
Can Jan teach it to sit?
Yes she can!
That's awesome.
It'll cost a hundred dollars though.
I wanted my dog George to do tricks. So Jan taught him some tricks and he was amazing.
That's great. What did Jan teach him?
He taught him to sit still and wait at the table until we are all seated to eat.
That's some good manners.
I thought so too. George is such a proper gentle man now.
He's better behaved than most guys I know.
Jan had been training my dog to do tricks.
Really, what has it learned?
To sit, roll over and a few others. I want her to be able to do a lot of them.
Is Jan an animal trainer by trade?
No she's just really good at teaching them.
That's so great to know someone who can do that.
I just voted for the winner.
Oh, yeah what were you voting for?
I was a judge in a sandcastle contest.
That's cool. What sort of sandcastle won?
It was a really big fairy tale castle with a dragon. I drew a line in the sand on the beach to show the winner.
That sounds like a lot of fun.
It was fun being the judge for the sandcastle contest today.
How did you judge it?
I just looked at how well-designed their sandcastle was and if it was creative.
So who won?
I dragged by foot across the sand in front of the winner, which was a fairy tale castle.
It's too bad those things get destroyed after.
Sasha took my family to dinner. We don't have much money so it really helped.
That's nice of Sasha.
She's always so generous.
She has a big heart. I see her giving money to the homeless all the time.
Last time I hung out with her, she bought a sandwich from the convenience store for the homeless man sitting outside.
She shows so much compassion.
You see that grab I had in the game?
The one handed one
Yes, I had such trouble shaking that guy.
He was a beast.
It was so close at the end.
I think that play turned the game around for your team.
I'm so proud of my performance in that basketball game.
You played so well!
Thank you! For a minute I thought I wouldn't be able to break myself free from being blocked, but I was finally able to catch that basketball with just one hand.
It was a miracle that you were able to free yourself.
I know, but once I did, I was in the perfect position to make a shot!
I'm happy for you and your teammates that you won.
I was finally able to catch the ball.
Yeah you really had to fight to get free.
I sure did. It was really hard.
It was so impressive.
I know right. There is going to be a lot of work I have to do with one hand but I can do it
That is true.
I helped win the game today! I caught a miracle ball with one hand and scored in the last few seconds.
That's the play dreams are made of!
And I was really being blocked, too. My teammates carried me off the court on their shoulders. It was amazing.
You're a great player, I hope there will be more games like this.
But they will never feel like this one!
Hey, what's up?
Nothing much Addison, how's thing with you?
Going on as usual, returned home in time.
Okay, great.
I need a good night rest before a long day of work.
Yes, indeed.
I just got home from work.
You must be really worn out and tired!
I am, I need to get a good night's rest before another long day at work.
I'll agree to that, you sure need it.
Thanks for the care.
You are welcome.
I was lucky I made it home last night with all the trouble my car was giving me.
Did you get to bed early so you could be ready for work?
I was able to get about ten hours sleep so I feel amazing this morning.
You're so lucky. I only get around six hours if I am lucky.
I'm so glad I didn't get home too late.
Yeah I know you have a big day at work tomorrow.
I think I'll be able to get a nice night of rest.
I think that would make a big difference for your day.
I always feel much more productive when I can get a good night of rest.
You and me both! I got in way too late, so I'm worried I won't get a lot of rest.
I wish I had a bigger car.
Why do you need a bigger car?
Because when I was moving my trunk couldn't fit all of my things.
So what did you do with the rest of your stuff?
I had to put the rest of the stuff in the backseat.
At least you were able to fit everything in.
My car is absolutely packed today!
I'm surprised it fit everything. I can barely squeeze into the passenger's seat.
Yeah, I'm moving soon and I thought I'd save money on a trailer by just stuffing everything into my car.
You've always been a pretty frugal person, Sydney.
I cant wait to get this car locked and loaded  for the trip.
Yeah we've got to hurry though because there is a lot of traffic here and there.
I am packing as fast as I can at the moment.
There for sure is a lot of stuff to put in here.
You're certainly right about that.
I know.
I think I finally thought of an idea that will work!
That's great. I know you have been working so hard!
The key was to look at the whole picture, rather than just focusing on the small details.
Oh yeah, that approach can sometimes change the way you tackle a problem.
I actually read a book on mindfulness, and the methods that humans can use to solve issues that are giving them trouble.
That sounds interesting. Can you give me the title of the book?
I'm going to be much nicer to Cameron from now on.
That's great, Jesse. What brought on this change?
Carson came over last night and he taught me a lesson about how one should treat their friends.
Have you talked to Cameron since then?
Not yet. But I'm going to head over there this afternoon and surprise him with tickets to tonight's ballgame.
Wow that's a great idea Jesse! You should buy him a beer at the game too.
I went a little far when I was teasing Cameron.
I saw him crying.
I really hurt Cameron this time.
Did he tell his older brother Casey?
Yes he did and Casey gave me a lesson I won't soon forget.
Is that why you are packing your bags?
I really do not understand what really happened. I didn't mean to cause so much harm.
Well, you did and you really should apologize.
I know, but I didn't deserve to be treated badly in return.
Sometimes you have to be taught a lesson so that you really understand what you did and can learn from it.
Well, I certainly learned this time.
Apologize and explain how you feel and things will be okay.
Carson taught me a lesson.
How did you feel?
Bad!
Why did Carson teach you a lesson?
I hurt Cameron.
You deserve it.
Would you like to help me bake a cake?
Sure what are we baking a cake for?
I'm planning a surprise party for my mom.
That sounds like fun!
I already got the eggs, milk, flour, sugar, vanilla and the frosting.
Well then we are ready to bake!
Wait until you hear what I've been up to.
I'm ready. Let me know what's going on.
I have been preparing for a surprise party for my mother.
That sounds exciting. How have the preparations been coming along?
I went to the store to pick up some milk, eggs, flour, sugar, vanilla and frosting. With those ingredients I was able to bake a cake.
Sounds like that would be delicious. I'm sure your mother will enjoy the cake.
I'm throwing a surprise birthday party for my mom.
That's a lot of work.
It will just include my dad and brothers, I'm making the cake right now.
I've never baked one, what's involved?
I've already got the eggs, milk, flour, sugar, vanilla, and frosting and I'll put it together and begin baking.
Sounds complicated. I assume the frosting comes after the baking.
We need to go to the store so I can pick up a few things.
I heard you were planning a surprise party for your mother?
It's going to be a huge party and we need the basic things for making a cake.
Just make sure you don't forget anything because we cant come back here tonight.
I have a perfect idea for a surprise for our mother.
Yeah, what do you think would be great for her party?
I am going to go and bake for her surprise party.
You are an excellent baker so I think she'll really like your cookies.
Yes, I have gathered some eggs, milk, sugar, vanilla, and frosting for the cookies.
This sounds so tasty just talking about it!
My friend Bailey says that he used to be a really lonely person until we met.
Really? He seems so happy and easy to like, it's like you guys are best friends.
We really are best friends, I've tried to introduce him to new things and he does the same for me.
I think you guys would make a great couple.
You really think so? I do know that we improve each others' lives.
You should think about taking your friendship to another level!
Hey, I'm about to plan a hike this weekend to Yosemite National Park with Bailey.
That sounds like it will be a great time.
Definitely, it will be great weather for being outdoors.
You and Bailey are a great pair.
I enjoy spending time with Bailey so much.
I hope you two enjoy your hike.
It really improved Bailey's and my life becoming best friends.
That's great, you two are a real match.
I think so too, I love introducing Bailey to new experiences.
You're really helping Bailey grow.
I am enjoying it myself too!
That is fantastic.
I do not understand why Gloria acts so nasty and mean after work.
Well, probably because she works longs days.
I get it, but no matter what, I always treat people with respect: even after a long day of work.
Well, have you tried to talk to her about it?
Not yet. I wanted to wait and see if the behaviour was a one time thing, or if it kept happening.
I get it. It's become a trend at this point, so now you're tired of it.
I believe in treating others with respect. That's something my mother taught me when I was a kid.
If only everyone treats others with respect, this world would be a better place. Are you still putting in long hours at the factory?
Yes, I love my work. We work on building cars every day.
You were always tinkering with cars.
Ever since high school when my dad bought me my first car, I have been fascinated by how they work.
You've found the perfect job for you.
I always believed that every person should be treated with utmost respect.
You can't go wrong with that.
That's how my parents taught me.
Your parents are nice people and I am glad to have met them.
I remember introducing them to you.
It was a pleasure.
I'm so proud of Carson, the boy I'm tutoring.
Is he doing better at school now?
Yeah, he remembered everything during his last test.
He must have studied hard.
He did, it makes me feel good to help him.
He must feel good being tutored.
I think I'm going to be late for dinner tonight.
You should send your dad a text message to inform him that you'll be late.
I'm sending the text to my dad now.
Great, knowing that will help him prepare for your arrival later.
The message has been sent. He responded and told me that he understands.
Great.
I sent my dad a text to let him know I will be late for dinner tonight.
I'm sure he will understand that it wasn't your fault.
The weather has just been so bad lately and I don't want to drive.
I wouldn't either with the way it has been snowing.
Maybe we can wait a bit before we take off.
I was still across town and our reservation was in ten minutes.
Yeah you were definitely more than ten minutes away.
I ended up texting my dad and luckily he was already there.
Oh, good. Glad he was able to help.
He wasn't very happy but it gave him time to look at the menu.
Skylar, you are always late. He should know that.
I have been having very powerful conversations with the lord lately.
Is that right, is it about anything in particular?
Yes I have been talking to him on my own but he asked me for something that was so intense I had to say it out loud to the world.
Oh wow, that sounds serious.
It really was.
Well I hope people listen to you.
I hope you don't think I'm crazy, but I heard from the Lord the other day.
What did the Lord say?
He told me to love my fellow man, and then I announced it to everyone at church so they could all hear the word of God.
If you continue to hear voices, let me know. Hopefully you're not schizophrenic.
Either way, it's still a good message!
I am so glad I was able to teach Alex.
Is he no longer your student.
He is not, he now works by himself.
I bet he is making good money.
He is and his got the skills.
Maybe the student is better than the master.
I am glad Alex is able to work and make his own money now.
Yeah it is really is nice that he is to be able to do it now.
It took a lot of hard work and practice for him to be able to get to where he is now.
His success just shows how good you are as a teacher!
Thank you.
Of course!
Alex is really able to work on her own now and make some good money.
That's great to hear.
Yeah. It took some days of hard work and practice, but Alex really learned a lot of what I taught her and used it.
I bet she really appreciates all that you've done for her.
I'm just happy to see her doing well.
If I were her, I would make sure to get you a gift.
I had to take a stress test recently, it was odd.
Oh really? How so?
I had a grenade and people were coming in. I had to hold my spot.
So what did you do?
I was a bit frozen. But by the time I made up my mind it was too late to change it so, being a ranking officer I sacrificed myself!
Woah. If that was real you’d be a hero.
That video game I was playing last night was so realistic!
Really, what happened?
I blew myself up with a grenade. I was holding it and had to decide whether to throw it out the window or take myself out if the enemy team came in. Since I'm the sergeant I decided to take one for the team.
Wow you're really courageous!
I am not sure if it was the correct decision, I couldn’t respawn until the next round of the game.
Well at least you can try again another time.
I didn't know what to do in this new game I got yesterday.
What is the game about?
It's a military simulation game, it only just came out.
Wow, that sounds exciting!
It is really realistic, I had a crazy moment in the game with a grenade, I din't know whether to throw it or hold onto it!
Wow that does sound realistic!
I lost the final round of my new video game last night.
Oh, how did that happen?
My character had a grenade and I had to make a quick choice on how to react, I decided to hold onto it and my character died so my team lost the round.
That sounds like a dumb decision.
It was really stupid and my team lost the competition as a result.
I'm sorry that happened to you.
I am getting so nervous about this performance
Just stay calm. I am about to start to play the music.
Give me a moment. I'm not sure if I am ready to see yet,
We cannot wait any longer. They are all waiting for your performance.
Fine. Let's get on with it!
Good luck! Break a leg.
I'm going to play some old music before I play my originals.
That sounds good. What kind of old music?
Well like the Beatles and stuff from the 70s.
Is that your favourite kind of music?
That's the kind of music I really like and I like the way they wrote the songs back then.
I can't wait to hear your originals.
Did you see me start playing?
Wait, what?
Yeah I was entertaining for some people at their home.
Oh, I didn't know you did that.
Yeah, you learn something new every day.
I have looked everywhere and no one is here. Now tell me, what exactly did you hear again?
I heard noises coming from the back room. Maybe it was just the dog. Sorry I called you and had you come over here for nothing.
The house looks fine. There are no robbers are here.
Thanks for coming and looking out for me Jan.
Better safe than sorry.
True. Sorry, I was just so scared.
Riley was worried my new clothes would bleed in the wash so he soaked them first.
Did that work? Was there a lot of coloured dye in the water.
Yeah, it did. I got a red shirt and dark navy pants, and the water had red and blue dye in it.
I've had bright colours bleed in the laundry before and ruin my other clothes. Smart move by Riley to soak them.
Yes, we both would have been very frustrated if they had ruined the rest of the clothes in the wash.
Any time you buy new coloured clothes it's probably not a bad practice to just go ahead and pre-soak.
That was nice of Riley to pre-soak my clothes that I bought for him, he likes his clothes to be nice and clean.
Yes, it was. He has a great reputation for his maintaining his clothes.
I think he should have bought his own laundromat! He's that good at it.
Oh I agree, I think he missed his calling in life!
That's true. He's also pretty adept at getting stains out of carpeting too.
I already knew that, I spilled wine on his floor a few years back and you'd never know I had after he treated it.
Hey what happened to that bag of clothes I had here?
Oh, the clothes you got at the thrift store?
Yeah, I had it here on the couch.
Riley put them in the sink to soak, they smelt like moth balls
I was going to wash them.
You still should, but now when you put them in with the rest of the laundry, they wont start off smelling from the moth balls.
So do you know anyone who would like a cat?
You have a cat?
Yeah. Last night while I was having a party a bunch of people saw a cat outside in the rain, so I brought it in. It doesn't have a tag or anything.
Oh wow that was nice of you. What does your dog think of it?
Well I haven't introduced them yet and am hoping I don't have to. That's why I'm looking for someone to take the cat.
You should probably post some signs around your neighbourhood first in case its owner wants it back. Then ask around after that.
I was just at home with my friends eating lunch. Then they pointed to a cat outside my window.
What did you do?
I went outside, picked it up and brought it inside. It was cold and rainy during the storm.
That's kind of you to give it shelter.
I opened up a can of cat food and it ate it all.
Poor thing must be hungry.
I'm glad you guys reminded me to bring in the cat.
No problem, we couldn't have them outside during the storm.
Yeah, Mr Sib does not deserve to be tortured like that.
No he does not, he's a great cat.
Hopefully the storm is not that bad and it passes over us quickly.
I heard it was going to be on and off all night long.
Wow look at that storm brewing, it looks like a rainy one!
It sure does, I hope everyone is inside and safe! Wait is that a cat over there on the curb?
Oh no! It is a cat, I wonder why he is still out there, maybe he is a stray
Poor guy, he's going to get soaked!
Wait here, I'm going to go get him and bring him inside from the rain.
Your are an awesome person, I am sure that cat will appreciate the warmth of the house.
Give me the cake!
Blow out the candles.
Give me some cake, I am going to feed it to the cats.
The cats could die, that is chocolate icing.
This cake is so delicious!
Your birthday cake is very yummy.
I am going to share it with my cats.
Aren't cats allergic to chocolate?
Not these cats, they love chocolate cake.
You are funny Kai!
I'm feeding my cats today after I finish eating this cake.
Don't forget to add to the candles.
Yes ,I'm going to blow them out before getting a slice.
The cake smells so good.
This is true.
I would love a slice too.
I am eating cake today
How do you go about it?
I will get the cake and blew out the candles to kingdom come.
So who are you sharing the cake with?
I decided to eat the cake and feed my cats
Good but I hope to get a slice too.
I bought myself a cake and candles.
No one came to celebrate with you?
We are in a pandemic, why would I have people come over now?
True. What kind of cake?
Carrot, hold on I have to feed the cats.
Okay.
I really appreciate my mum getting me new shoes.
Just try and take better care of these and try not to get them dirty this time.
I didn't mean to get the last ones dirty, but it was raining hard out last week.
Well you should have washed them off if they were dirty.
I'm sorry I will wash them off next time.
I just love these new shoes.
Those look great, I have to have those. Where did you get them?
At the mall. My mom and I did some shopping yesterday.
Sounds fun. Nothing beats shopping.
I went to the mall with my Mom the other day.
Cool. Did you get any cool clothes?
Well, we both had to buy shoes.
For a special occasion?
I've got a party to go to on Friday, and she's got a business luncheon.
Awesome. New shoes make everything more fun!
I didn't really do anything today other than go to the mall with my mom.
Did you buy anything?
Yeah, I needed new shoes.
But the ones you're wearing are your old shoes.
I'm not going to wear my new shoes just to go to your house.
Thanks. That makes me feel really special.
Hey did you see where Skylar got that car?
She bought it at the auction last week.
It looks kind of cheap, do you think she will mind if I check it out for any problems?
I guess not, hopefully nothing's wrong with it.
Alright, I'll take a look at it.
I will let Skylar know.
I just finished assessing Skylar's new car.
Is the car brand new?
It's not. She got it for the cheap at the auction.
Did you find problems with the car?
I gave it a clean bill of health.
I should take mine for a check-up too.
You have to make sure when you buy cheap cars that you aren't getting ripped off.
I've heard horror stories about cars from auctions.
There are a lot of horror stories since there's no warranty.
Did you find any issues with Skylar's car?
Nothing major but a few minor ones.
That's a relief.
Skylar bought this cheap car at the auction this Saturday. I had to check it to make sure it didn't have any problems.
You are right to be concerned. I am suspicious of cheap cars.
Well, that doesn't mean expensive cars have no issues.
True. What did you find out, is Skylar's car good to go?
There were a couple of minor issues, but generally it's a good car.
That's terrific.
Do you want to go with me to this family's house? I am helping them out.
Sure, why not.
I have to clean the cat cage. Does it look too dirty?
I'm more of a dog person myself, but this cat looks cute.
I'm going on a family trip.
Awesome, where are you going?
I'm going to my grandma's house.
What will you do with your cat?
I cleaned her cage and I am going to take her.
That's fun. Enjoy your trip!
Don't you hate it when people can't be direct?
You sound mad, what happened?
I was caught between two people who could not communicate today
That sounds like no fun at all.
Quinn was trying to tell his friend something, but couldn't, so he had me do it instead.
That must be so annoying, sorry!
I had to do Quinn a huge favour the other day.
What did he want this time?
He wanted to send a message to a mutual friend but couldn't get it to work and asked me to pass it on instead.
Well what are friends for?
Yeah, it really was an easy favour to do.
Bonus points to you for being such a good friend.
I feel awful about my dog biting Skylar.
Is she okay?
Yes she will be okay, but he bit her lower lip pretty hard.
How did it bite her lip?
She was trying to give it a kiss and it bit her.
That's too bad, but at least she should be ok!
I feel so bad I could cry.
Oh, I'm sorry to hear that, what's the matter?
My girlfriend Skylar came over today and asked my dog for a kiss.
Why do you feel bad about a kiss?!
He just got so excited that he bit her lower lip. He didn't mean to do it.
Oh no that's not good!
Austin bit Skylar on the lower lip, when she asked for a kiss.
You need to get rid of that dog. If he bit once, he will do it again.
We just need to give him more training.
You need to find him a different home. He will bite her again. He has tasted blood.
I think Skylar hates my dog.
What did he do?
She asked for a kiss and instead of giving him one he bit her lower lip pretty hard.
Why would he do that?
It just happened fast and I didn't even realize he did it until afterwards.
That's very concerning.
I did the wrong thing again.
What did you do this time?
My friends and I wrote on the wall at the park.
That is so wrong.
We sure got arrested for it. I enforced my right to remain silent.
You never learn.
I just told him to keep his mouth shut.
How did you end up getting caught spray painting the car.
Chris was suppose to be the lookout and was not paying attention, to busy getting messed up.
What happened when you got arrested?
I told him to not say anything, that they had no proof it was us.
Best to be quiet, and make the police build a case.
I can't believe I got arrested last week?
What happened?
I was spray painting a fence and the cops showed up.
Oh no, did they question you?
Yes, they did when they brought me to the station.  I didn't want to answer any questions without a lawyer.
That was probably a good idea Carson.
Hey my wife just got into a car accident.
Oh no! What is her condition?
She seems fine just minor injuries.
I see. So she is okay.
Yes for the most part she is just resting at the ER now.
That's good then, I hope she'll be better soon.
Oh my goodness, my baby got into an accident. I gotta go now!!
Calm down Lee! You need to chill!
Hurry up. I hope my baby is fine.
Calm down Lee! I am pulling into the hospital emergency room!!
I hope she's ok
She'll be fine
I have been crying and losing it for the past few hours.  Sarah is unconscious.  She had a car accident this afternoon.
You want to talk about it?  I'll be home in an hour if you want to come over.
That might help.  I don't feel like I want to be alone right now.
I'll get take out on the way home.  We can have a dinner.
Sounds good.
I'll see you soon.
I have known Lee since grade school.
You've been great friends.
Now for my apprenticeship, I will be working for her.
Isn't that cool?
I guess so, yes.
Good luck!
I worked for Lee diligently
Yes, you have to. Lee is your boss
Yes, as part of my apprenticeship it's quite important
Soon you'll become the boss. It's just a matter of time
Hi, I'm Robin. Can you do me a favour?
Sure, what is it?.
We know each other from Jan's. All of the sudden my car got some problem and I just called the insurance and they pull my car to the shop.
So sad to hear what happened. Do you need me to drop you in your school?
It's just some engine problem, but yes that would be great
Sure, come in
I can't believe my car broke down.
Did the mechanics say what happened?
Yeah, the car is really old. They think the transmission is going bad.
That's awful, how are you able to get around then?
Well luckily I have been able to catch a ride to school with Jan's friend.
That's good, at least you have a friend to help you out during this tough time.
Hey guys, thank you so much for picking me up.
No problem! We're always here for you.
If not for you guys I would've missed school today.
You can call us anytime you have car problems.
I didn't really expect my car to break down today.
We just need to get some jumper cables and I'm sure we can get it started after school.
There is a lot to do on my daily routine so I think organization is the key
it most definitely is.  I think that overall you should be a good for your role
yeah they are going to recognize that in my next meeting
I'm glad you took notes on this
I did, granted there all in my head but they are their for sure
That is awesome.
I have this really important meeting I can't be late today.  I need to make a mental note of it.
Why don't you put it in your calendar?
I did that too.  It'll send reminders to my phone.
It's better if you just remember to do it on your own.
Exactly. Technology has failed me in the past.
Nothing's better than trusting yourself.
I have a lot to do today, could you remind me about this meeting later.
Well I could remind you but what type of meeting is it?
I have to meet with my boss to discuss opening another location.
That sounds cool, what time is the meeting?
He wants to meet at the coffee shop a little after five.
Okay, I will do my best to remind you, if I remember.
My mom took Sasha's mom out to lunch this week for taking care of me while my parents were away.
Where did your parents go?
They had to make a sudden trip to visit my grandmother who was ill so my mom asked Sasha's mom to look after me.
That's nice of her to do that.
Sasha and I are best friends so I was excited to hang out at her house more.
You two are inseparable.
I am so hungover from last night.
Didn't you go to that new club that had opened up?
Yeah, I was literally partying all night long. I drank too much.
Did you get any sleep?
Honestly no. I know that was stupid, but I will have to make up for it later.
Make sure you drink enough coffee though to get you through the workday.
I'm so hungover today and I didn't sleep! Went to a party last night
Did you at least have fun?
Yeah, I did!
Well, you had a better night than me! All I did was read and watch the Daily Show. You better take some aspirin and get a nap sometime today, maybe you'll feel better.
You're right, but I don't have time for a nap today, but I will take some aspirin!
I went out partying with friends last night.
Was it fun with your friend's last night?
Sure! it was. I drank a lot of alcohol.
How much did you drink?
A lot and I didn't get much sleep.
Oh no..
I'm so tired today from all the partying and drinking I did last night.
What was the special occasion?
Nothing really. I just felt like going out with friends to party.
What time did you get home last night?
Late. I didn't get much sleep.
I can tell. You've been scanning that same item for the last few minutes.
Riley was such a .bad person. We had a fight, and he slammed my fingers in the door.
That's awful! Did he do that by accident?
No. Worse. He pushed my fingers in the door jam and slammed the door.
Oh my God. You're lucky you didn't lose your fingers!
It hurts like heck, and I'm definitely going to lose my nails. They're turning black and blue.
You need to stay away from this guy. What is wrong with him?
I'm fighting with you but dang that hurt.
Sorry I hurt your fingers.
Yea that wasn't cool.
Let's take you to the hospital.
That's going to leave a mark trust me.
I'm so sorry
I can't believe I just got into a fight with Riley!
Wow, what happened?
She got angry at me over not hanging out with her, and pushed my finger in the door jam and then slammed the door!
That sounds like it hurt!
Yes, it really hurt a lot. I had to ice my finger all night to help with the swelling and pain.
That's awful, I hope you end up feeling better!
That was not an easy game to win!
No, it didn't look like it, and it went on forever!
Well I guess what they say about practice making perfect, isn't correct, but close to it!
Very true, I know you have been practicing for weeks!
I have, and it has done a number on my joints but it has to be good for me!
Of course it has to be good for you, its exercise right!
Practice really pays off.
That's what they say.
Look I put in weeks of practice now I'm skilled and won a game.
Practice really does make perfect.
I can't believe I won the tetherball tournament.
How did you do it?
I practiced for weeks.
Seems like all your hard work paid off.
It didn't even seem like hard work considering I enjoyed doing it.
I wonder if I can win a tournament in eating.
I really like how this game pays off by the day.  I am so glad I got to know the ins and outs of it
Yeah it is a truly fun game to play isn't it
It most definitely is.  I think I'll have to reassess what I truly want out of life too,  I'm so glad I won this game by far
Yeah that is so true. The game is really great and has a lot of benefits
So true.  I am just glad I won to be honest
Same here.  I am so happy for you.
I won the tetherball tournament today!
Way to go Bailey! I am so proud of you!
Thank you! It was a lot of training. At least five weeks of doing so.
Well, I'm glad to hear that. Did you get a trophy or anything?
No, but I did get a $25 gift card to Home Depot. Gonna buy some number.
Well, go and get it! And congratulations once again.
It was nice of Alex to help me learn the computer.
He is an expert.
The project I am handling needs a lot of computer work and I am no good at it at all.
You got the right person with you then.
I am so lucky.
You sure are.
Alex I have been having some major computer problems.
I can help  you, Quinn.
Thanks Alex. For some reason my device manager has not been showing up.
Okay, hand the computer over to me and I will see if I can fix it.
Thanks, here you go.
Okay,  this is super easy. You just press this button right here and it will work.
She needs to understand that we need to know where she is after school.
You were worried because she was a few minutes late?
Yes. There is a lot going on in the neighbourhood and not knowing where she is made me worry .
I guess. I always said I will give my kids a bit of freedom.
I need her to understand that she must have permission to go somewhere.
I know being punished will be a huge lesson.
Go to your room! You know you are supposed to come straight home from school
I just was talking to my friends! I didn't even do anything wrong
You disobeyed! It doesn't matter what you were doing
Whatever. I guess I will just never talk to my friends again
You can always talk to your friends but only after you've let me know where you are or come home
Whatever I am basically an adult.
I'm so glad the food plan worked.
I think everyone is glad it worked, what are you up to now as president?
I'm working with a lot of charities.
Solving what kinds of problems?
Since starvation isn't an issue anymore we're working on housing.
There's always more problems to be solved.
I fulfilled some of my campaign promises.
What did you do?
I abolished starvation in the states.
That is very commendable. What else did you do?
I promised that as president I would take up lots of charities and I have completed that promise as well.
You are a great person.
I've been so busy with charity work.  It's what I signed up for when I became president.
You've done such amazing things like how you built housing for the homeless and abolished starvation in the states.
It's been years of hard work but I am proud to say that I've accomplished most of what I've set out to do.
What charities are you working on now?
I spent today filming commercials for an organization that does fundraising to feed the children across the country.
You are so committed to your vision.
The top detective have been working on collecting evidence in a murder case.
Did they succeed?
Yes!
How was that possible?
I am a prosecutor and brought the case to trial and won.
Nice work.
I worked with top detectives on the murder case.
What kinds of evidence closed the case?
Fingerprints and DNA. The trial was still hard to win.
Was it because of the jurors?
No there was a risk of mistrial because everything was so publicized.
I also heard one of the jurors was removed from the case.
We had to take this case to trial. As head prosecutor I knew that.
Did you have enough evidence?
We had top detectives on it, collecting loads of it. It went to trial last week.
Well, how was the trial?
We won the case! I am so grateful.
Awesome job Robin!
I love going to the tournament but I don't just root for one team. I'm excited for everyone that plays.
Don't some of the team fans shout you down?
Yes but I bring a token from each team so I always have the right color up no matter who scores.
That sounds like a lot of work.
It's fun to do and makes people laugh anyway.
I think you might have to become a professional cheerleader.
I love watch this game.
Who is your team?
I support them all.
You support all of them? Where's the fun in that?
It's a lot of fun knowing my team won't lose.
That is actually a good strategy.
I will be at the tournament this weekend.
Oh cool. Who are you rooting for?
I'm going to be supporting every team at the tournament.
Why is that?
I don't have a favourite, so I'm going to cheer for all of them.
That's nice to hear.
I love this tournament.
Do you have a favourite?
I support every team.
I guess you cannot lose if you support them all.
I like the sport so much it does not matter which team wins.
You cannot lose with that attitude.
I finally broke away from Cameron's cage. It feels great to be finally free.
I am sorry for what you went through. How did you escape?
I had to be very patient and creative.
I am glad you are free. Has the culprit been arrested?
I made a report to the police but they are still searching for him.
I hope they'll find him soon.
I'm finally free from that slave job I had for so long.
How did you manage to escape it?
It took a long time but I waited for the right moment to escape.
How did you get past the lock on the cage?
I used my clever ingenuity and taught myself how to pick it.
I'm happy to hear you're free from Cameron now.
I have always found that I tend to be a good listener, and that helped me make a decision to become a therapist to help people understand their problems and maybe work through them to improve their lives.
I know you're a good listener.  You have always given me your undivided attention.
I'm sorry, what did you say?  I was watching this hilarious Ryan George video on YouTube.
You weren't listening to me just then?
Of course I was, Sheila.
My name's Aubrey, You've been seeing me for three years.  I think maybe I need to schedule a new appointment with someone else....
I really like the job that I have in a way.  It makes me want to learn more about the pros and cons of therapy
I like the way you think.  I could totally see you as someone who talks to kids a lot
Yeah. It is something that I truly like to do.
There is most definitely a laid out career path for you
There certainly is.  I love to see where I am heading
Right, I hope the best for you
My mother said I was always good at listening to others and giving good advice.
You have always done that for me, I can understand why you became a therapist.
I enjoy listening to peoples problems and trying to help them solve them.
People should have someone they can talk to and express their feelings when they are having a hard time.
I don't panic around cops like most of my friends.
Cops aren't friendly to me so I don't like them.
You know my dad and his brothers were all cops, right?
I know your dad was a cop. I didn't realize your uncles were too.
Most of them are cool dudes just trying to do their jobs.
I hope they're cool.
You know I grew up where my father and uncles were cops
oh I see why you like cops
yes, I think they're doing a great job
it's in your DNA.
I caught Addison cheating on me.
What?! With who?
This kid named Holly from her summer camp. They met last summer.
I'm so sorry Jan. How did you find out?
I followed Addison home after softball and Holly was waiting for her. I looked in her bedroom window and they were making out.
That really sucks, Jan. Do you want me to beat them up?
I think we can get home by calling my parents
I really hope they'll answer the phone
I just got a hold of them and they are on the way
I hope they get here soon because I am getting really hungry
It was a scary day to be lost in the forest.  Kai was in charge of the map but then we lost our way and were stranded.
How did you find your way out of the forest?
I had taken pictures along the way so we backtracked and try to find things that we recognized to guide us back.
That's smart.
Luckily it was still early in the day when we got lost so we had sunlight for many hours.
What time was it when you guys found your way out?
I really don't like crowds, I don't think I'd like that concert
Come on just listen to some of their songs, I know  you'll love them.
Fine..
See aren't they good?
I actually do kind of like them... Maybe I will go
Yay that's awesome!
What are you listening to?
I am listening to the hottest new band. Want to hear them?
Yes, I really enjoy them.
I know you don't like crowds but we should go see them in concert.
I would love to hear them in concert even if I don't like crowds they are amazing.
Okay let's go then!
Last weekend I was over at Aubrey's house and she insisted we sit and listen to that band she loves.
What did you think of them? Are they as good as she claims?
I actually really liked the music so she asked me to go to the concert with her.
You hate crowds though! Did you go?
Yes I did end up going and I had a really great time.
I can't believe she convinced you, but glad you had a really good time!
I thought my dog, Angie, was lonely while I was at work so I adopted another dog from the shelter.
That's good that you got your dog a friend.
He's much calmer when I leave the house in the morning now.
Is he getting along with the new dog?
Yes, he's so protective of it.  The new dog is a puppy and Angie is very motherly with it.
Have you named the dog yet?
I think my dog gets lonely when I'm not home.
Dogs are like people, they need company too.
Right, so I got him another dog.
That was thoughtful.
So I have some exciting news. I got another dog this weekend.
What! That is exciting. Why?
I felt like my dog got lonely. He was down when I would get back after a long day.
Aww...that is sad. Yeah dogs are very social creatures.
I think it's worked out so far. They are both happy and excited when I get home.
That's great! Dogs are such a great thing to have around.
I'm going to go and help Tracy's campaign for her cause.
That's really great of you.
Yeah, it's such an honourable cause.
What is it for?
I have no idea. I just saw that it had a lot of likes on social media.
I guess it's the thought that matters.
Tracy is doing an amazing job with the kitchen soup.
What has she been up to?
She has been making meals for the frontline workers.
That is very thoughtful of her
Yes, today I made donations of food to her course
That is really nice, I will pass by and see what I can give.
The software program that I have been working on the last 2 years is coming along
What is the program for?
It is a new software system for my work to use.
Sounds like you have been busy.
I have, the team and I put a timetable together so we can meet our goals.
I think the first phase should be completed by next month.
Yes, I agree that sound reasonable.
The second phase should be ready by December.
I'm not sure if we can finish it by then.
Ok then, let's aim for January.
Sounds perfect!
I need to move out the deadline for completion of that proprietary software system project I am working on.
What makes you say that? Because I don't think that sounds good for your team.
One of my team members is out on family leave and executed the bulk of the comparability studies.
You should just have everyone else take on some of it and work extra hours to keep your deadline.
I thought of that but only one other person knows how to execute the comparability trials.
Sorry to hear that. I hope you can get some extra help until your person comes back to work.
I was assigned to work on the research problem.
Your boss must trust you very much.
I am required to find solutions.
What will be your first step?
To begin, I must draw questions from the data.
Then you should get started.
This research problem is really wearing me out.
Oh, I forgot you were working on that. How's it coming?
Well, I am finding new solutions, but it's tiring working with so much data.
I know that feeling. Make sure to take breaks when you can and stay positive about it.
Thanks. I know it will all pay off in the end.
I bet it will. When you're a big shot professor, you'll remember these days.
I can't go to lunch today. I'm working on my research project.
Oh, what project is that? From work?
Yeah, from work. I need to find some solutions by next week.
How are you tackling the problem?
Well right now I'm just looking at the data and drawing questions from it. After that I'll use some analyzation tools and see where that leads.
Sounds like a headache! Well if you change your mind about lunch give me a call.
I'm reviewing the data for the research project.
Did you make any progress to find solutions?
I have a few questions that I need to research and find the answers.
How many questions do you need to research?
I'm researching five questions, and I'm going to the library to look for answers.
I'll go with you.
I have formulated a few questions about the data if you want to assist.
Of course, when do we need to have this problem solved?
By next Monday I think so we have plenty of time.
We better get working because this thing is over 30 pages long.
Most of it is fluff that we won't need anyway.
I hope so because we might have to pull a couple of nights.
Did you forget your money today?
Kind of...I actually don't have enough.
Here, I got you. All paid for.
Thanks, you're a lifesaver. I should get more money today.
What's with the concerned look, Addison.
I don't have enough money to buy lunch.
Don't worry I'll buy it for you.
You're such a good friend.
You can pay me back when you have it.
Well of course.
Yesterday I bought lunch for Addison, she didn't have enough to cover it.
That was sweet of you, I bought it for her last week.
With her mom dying, they just don't have the money anymore.
I think we should take up a collection to pay for it for the rest of the year, it will be one less thing she got to worry about.
The swimming team had a meeting today.  I went and joined it.
You are a good swimmer.  You'll do well.
I figure I am new to the school, joining the team will help me make friends.
I'm sure it will! People become really tight in sports.
I was on my other high school's swim team so I know.  I love the competitions.
Don't you have to get up at like 4am for practice?
Hey I know this school has a pool but does it have a swim team?
Yeah we're actually pretty good
Do you know how I sign up?
My friend Rachel is on the team I can get her to help you
That would be great I'd love to join
Nice, we can always use new people on the team
I'm good at swimming, but new as well!
I joined the team too.
When is the first game?
We can work on the schedule, but I'm sure it's in March.
Where?
Atlanta.
I'm really excited about joining the new swim team at school
I'm sure you will do well since you were state champion last year
I know but I just want to impress everyone on the team
I'm sure you want to impress that cute girl over there too
You know me very well
You guys are the best friends a boy could have.
We'll always be here for you man.
And I'll be here for you guys.
Nothing better than when we are all together.
That's true!
I really love to give some gifts to my friends, this is something I really enjoy.
I know, we all know.
All I ever wanted is to show appreciation, and people like it.
I remember you always giving some gifts.
Yeah, that's me
We all love you.
Do you like the present?
I did, it was so nice of you to give it to me.
I wanted you to know that it meant a lot when you came and watched the house for those 2 weeks.
That was no problem at all.
I helped a student with math today.
But you aren't a teacher, right?
No, I'm a tutor in math and science.
Oh, that's right. Could you help tutor my kid in math?
Yeah, I'm free this weekend. Let me know when your kid has time.
I helped a student today.
Was it for the math test on Friday?
Yeah, they were struggling with some of the problems, so I gave her a hand.
Good job! She must have really appreciated that.
I'm here to help you.  What do  you need specifically?
I'm so confused.  I don't even know were to start!
Pick something you struggle with most and tell me.
I'm having a real hard time with algebra equations.  Could you walk me through some examples?
Of course I can.  Here, I drew you a problem.  Show me what you would do first.
I would take the x and subtract it from the right side.
I really love Alex he broke my heart
what did he do this time?
I showed him my love and he pulled away from me
has he talked to you since?
No not even one word.
he will get around, just wait
I can't believe that Alex reacted the way he did when I tried to show him love.
What did he do?
He pulled away from me.
That's not a good sign.
It wasn't. I think it's time for me to move on from him.
You'll find somebody that's right for you eventually.
Jordan and I love Harry Potter.
Are you going to see the newest movie when it comes out in theaters?
Yes. We plan on seeing every showing of the Half Blood Prince.
Wow. Exciting. Maybe I can go with you two on one of those showings.
Yeah. Let me know when you're free to go.
Jordan and I really have a thing for Harry Potter movies.
I agree with that.
I mean we share a love for Harry Potter.
So does the reading and movie going public.
Jordan and I made a pact to see every showing of Half Blood Prince that we can when it is released.
Start saving your nickels for popcorn.
I've spent most of the day getting everything ready and organized for my trip out of town.
How long will you be gone?
Probably about a week.
Do you need me to pick up your newspapers and mail?
That would be great. Could you take a look around the house and make sure everything is OK?
Sure, I'd be happy to . Have a good time.
I finally got all my stuff packed up and ready to go on my business trip.
Where are you heading?
I am going to a conference in Tampa with other leaders in my industry.
How much did you end up packing?
I packed just enough for one week plus a little extra.
Well I hope it goes well and have a safe trip!
I think I'm finally ready to leave for my trip.
Do you have everything packed?
I spent all day getting things together and organized and put them in the car tonight.
When do you plan to leave?
After I've double checked all my things.
You are such an organizer. I'm sure you're ready to go already.
I was finally able to figure out who Kendall was
How did you manage to do that?
Well, it wasn't easy at all. But it was useful because it revealed a lot about Kendall
I'm glad you were able to manage that. It sounds like it was difficult but worth it
Kendal was hiding so much about her identity.
What did you find out about her?
She changed her name and is running away from home.
Did she tell you why she's doing it?
Her husband was abusive and she was running away from him.
That's a good reason for doing so!
I bought a dress for my girlfriend.
That's a big purchase. You know her size and taste?
Yes! She already told me she wanted it so I want to surprize her.
Oh that's really nice.
It's in a gorgeous box too so I hope she's happy.
I'm sure she'll love it.
What do you think of this dress I bought for my girlfriend?
I like it.
Good; I'll just put it in this gift box and wrap it.
What's the occasion?
Her birthday is in two days.
I'm sure she's going to love it.
It was tough but it had to be done.
Breakups are never easy.
Especially when you were friends before hand.
Do you think you remain friends after this?
That's what we are planning but you never know.
Only time will tell.
Hey, do you want to join the team?
What team? What's up?
I'm putting together a hockey team.
A hockey team? We live in Arizona, dude.
I know. I thought we could do skate hockey. I've found enough people for a team and a half. You in?
Sure! Sounds like a great time. I just have to learn to skate first...is that an issue?
Hi, who are you?
I am Jerky. I am working in the US and you?
I also worked in the US and I am interested to play hockey and you?
I am also interested in hockey. What are you doing?
I am in lockdown with my family and you?
I worked from home during lockdown.
I have really been wanting to play some Hockey!
Same here, I  miss it so much
Would you want to play with me and some friends?
Yeah I would love to!
Okay I'm going to put a team together for us
That sounds awesome, I am looking forward to it.
I wanted to play hockey with my friends so I got a team together.
That is a wonderful idea.
I have invited four other friends and would like to invite you too.
That is very kind of you to ask.
So, will you join our team?
Certainly, I would love to play hockey with your friends.
Do you want to join my new hockey team?
what? I can't believe you're recruiting a team.
you know how much I love hockey.
You watch every single NHL game like a fanatic.
And I want to play too so I hope I can count on you to join.
Okay I need to start exercising anyways.
I don't know why but helping people makes me feel so good.
Yeah, I feel great when I help someone becomes better.
It's such a rewarding feeling.
Agreed, its priceless.
I have been thinking a lot lately about facing my fears.
Yeah, what is your biggest fear?
Well needles have always been a thing for me, but I decided to pierce my ears to deal with that fear last week.
How did it go? Were you able to do it the first try?
I was actually. I felt pretty scared, but I took some deep breaths and it went fine!
My biggest fear is heights and I don't think I am ready to face that one yet!
I got my ears pierced the other day. I did it to conquer my fear of needles.
You're afraid of needles? I didn't know that
Yes, it's pretty bad, I hate those things. The piercing didn't help because they used a gun, not needles.
So you're still going to have to work on it.
Yeah, someday. But not today.
You know I have a fear of needles.
I didn't, but don't we all?
I don't know about that, but I hate injections.
So, have you had any shots lately?
No, but I had my ears pierced.  I wanted to conquer my fear of needles.
A little odd, most people do it to wear earrings.
Guess what?
What?
I have my first audition tomorrow to be on Broadway
Oh wow, that's so cool, you've always wanted to turn dancing into a career
I know, for as long as I could remember. I just really love to dance.
Well, good luck
I grew up loving to dance and I decided I want to be a dancer.
How are you going to become a dancer?
I've been accepted into a dance company in New York.
Congratulations, when do you leave?
I leave on Thursday. I can't wait to start my career.
I'll come visit you in New York some time.
I just got my big break!
What do you mean?
Well, I got hired by a ballet company!
Oh, I'm so happy for you. You've been dancing for a long time haven't you?
Yeah, since I was 3! I just love to dance.
Well, congratulations to you!
I think you should stay home for a few days from work because of your back.
I cannot afford to miss any work, I have so many bills.
I can talk to the manager and ask that you be given some paid time off.
You could do that for me?
Yeah I think so, if it is injury related I don't see why not.
You are such a good friend, thank you.
On a scale of 1-10, how bad would you say that pain is?
I would say the pain is at about 6, and I have a pretty high pain tolerance.
How much movement do you have in your back? Can you bend?
It hurts to move, it hurts to sit, I can't bend certain ways, I just want it to feel better.
Sounds to me like you may just need a few days off in order to allow your back to heal.
I think you are right, if I keep moving like this, it is never going to get better.
I told Quinn to take a few days off.
Why?
He's been in really bad pain from his back and he's useless at work.
Oh yes then it's better for him to be home resting.
I hope he feels better. He's got an appointment with a chiropractor tomorrow.
I hope he's feeling better soon.
I placed a bid for this painting at the auction.  It was a valuable piece of art.
Did you end up getting it?
I did.  I paid a lot for it, but it's an investment.
You must really liked it to pay that much for it.
It was over two hundred thousand.  It's by a living artist.
You are such a supporter of the arts.
Ten thousand!
Do we have another bid, I hear fifteen thousand
Twenty thousand
Twenty thousand, going once, twice, sold, to the man in the tall hat
Yes, finally my art collection will be complete
Please collect your items at the end of the of the auction
So I went to an estate auction yesterday.
Oh, did you find anything worthwhile?
I saw one painting that was valuable and bid on it.
Did you win the auction?
I sure did! Come by after work and see if you recognize the artist.
Okay, I'll be over in a couple of hours. I can't wait to see it.
They asked me nicely to quit playing with their little boy.
Were you doing something that upset them?
I was just pushing him on the swings at the park. They weren't rude or anything.
Maybe because you are a stranger. I wouldn't want a stranger playing with my kid either.
I stopped and walked away after introducing myself. I kind of understand.
Yeah, too many kidnappings nowadays. You need to think the next time.
I didn't realize how loud we were during the movie.
I know, I guess we were being pretty chatty.
When that other person asked us to be quiet we obliged without protest though.
Yes, true but I still feel bad don't you?
Oh well, now we know for next time to keep it down.
True, I don't want to feel embarrassed again.
I was mortified!
I can imagine!  Being singled out by the Dean like that!  Horrifying!
It was my favourite set of earrings too!
Hey, I would have done the same thing.
When you drop a set of diamond earrings, you are entitled to crawl around looking for them! No matter where you are!
Well, you meant no offense, and you stopped when the police came to the table. And only one of the trustees actually screamed.  So it could be worse.  I just don't know if the YouTube footage will be flattering.
I really hate your girlfriend! She is so controlling and mean
Please stop! Even if you feel that way she is still my girlfriend and I can't stand hearing people talk bad about her.
I'm so sorry! I just thought with you venting to me about how she wouldn't let you go out, you'd like to hear agreeance.
I get that, but I still lover her and I want you to accept her as well.
Totally understood, I meant no offense.
I believe you. Thanks for understanding
I need to buy bread and water but I'm lazy to do so.
You should have bought it earlier
I realize that now. It's too late because my car is now buried deep in the snow.
What do we do now?
I guess we can do without it for now.
We do not have a choice.
I can't believe I got stuck in the snow yesterday.
How did that happen?
I waited to long to get some bread and water at the store. I ended up driving late when the storm was bad.
How did you get out?
I was able to call for help and a snowplough came and got me.
Were you able to get some bread and water?
It looks like I won't make it out to the store tonight.
I told you to go earlier!
I know! I should have listened to you. There is so much snow my car is literally stuck!
What do you need from the store?
Just some bread and water.
I'll grab you some tomorrow morning before I head to your house.
Rock, Are you there?
Sure Babe. What's up?
I'm stuck in the snow. Can you come and get me?
Where are you?
I'm at the Red Lion Grocery on 7th. I know I shouldn't have come out in the storm, but we were low on bread and water, and I didn't realize it was so late until I came out of the store and found a drift on the hood of my car.
I'll be there in five minutes. Stay in the store until I get there. And could you pick me up a six-pack of Dr. Pepper while you are there?
I went to the zoo today for the first time today in a long time.
Did you have fun?
No. It actually made me sad.
Why is that?
Seeing the animals in cages made me cry.
I guess it'll be a while before you go to the zoo again.
I cant believe I started crying at the zoon.
Why did you cry?
Seeing the animals in the cages really got to me man.
Yeah, animals should be free.
That's how I feel.
Me too.
I think I'm going to go vegan.
Seriously? Why?
I took my nephew to the zoo yesterday and he asked all these questions about whether the animals felt sad. I guess it got to me and I started crying while looking at them in their cages.
Oh, that sounds like a bad time. I get it though.
Yeah, we were both just standing there crying and looking at these monkeys.
My partner's been vegan for the last ten years so I can get some pointers for you if you want.
I'm going to be helping Quinn with her bridal shower
That's nice of you.
Yes, poor thing doesn't have a clue what to do.
You've always been really creative at party planning.
I gave her a good idea and she liked it.
Well, that sounds like fun.
Hey Quinn, what's wrong, you look deep in thought
I am, I have to plan a 50th party for my mom and I really have no idea where to even start.
Oh I can help! I love planning and organizing
That would be amazing, thank you so much
I have an idea, let's pick a venue first, how about the clubhouse?
Sounds good, I'll see if they have availability
Did you go to Quinn's party last night? I had to work so I couldn't go.
Yes, I did. It was a Luau theme and it was really a lot of fun.
He asked me what he should do and I told him a luau. I was wondering if he did it.
There were lots of leis and different kinds of snacks and music. Felt like Hawaii.
That's great. I wish I could have been there but it was a major night for the company.
It felt good to help Quinn out on planning the party.
I had no idea he asked for your help.
Yeah. He said he couldn't figure out what kind of theme to go with.
What did you suggest?
Since it was a party for all his friends, I just suggested to go with a movie theme.
That sounds like a good time.
I can't do anything on this computer anymore because it takes forever to load!
Do you have enough money to buy a new one right now?
Yes, but I was going to use the money to go to a concert!
I can give you the money for a computer if you want and you can just pay me back when you want to.
I'll buy the computer since I need it desperately and I'll just work more hours for the concert tickets.
Let's look in the newspaper advertisements and see where you can get a good deal!
I can't stand my slow computer.
Do you know what is wrong with it?
I think it is probably super bad hackers.
That doesn't seem likely.
I need a new one.
I guess you could get a new computer maybe.
I knew I could get in trouble, and I thought about that, but I broke into the house on the corner anyway.
Why did you take that risk?
I really needed money to buy my medication.  I ran out, and I couldn't think of any other way to get enough.
I understand that's hard, but robbing someone.  That just wasn't right.
I know, I feel bad about it but I just didn't think I had any other choice.
I brought back my stuff home!
Are you done for the session?
Yes! I just finished my freshmen year of college.
I wish you all the best.
Thank you!
I am so happy I just finished my freshman year at college, I am back home with all of my stuff.
That's great! Did you make any new friends?
I did. I have so many new friends, some I will see this summer, but the rest I have to wait to see next year.
Well, I am happy you're back. Now I get to hang out with you. Should we catch up over lunch soon?
Yes, I've missed you so much. I think we should go out for lunch and some drinks.
Awesome, I will call you today to schedule a lunch. I am so excited.
I brought my stuff back home.
Why did you do that?
I just finished my freshman year of college.
Are you going to be living back home for your sophomore year?
I rewarded my third period class today for doing such a good job.
Oh what did you do for them?
I handed out a bunch of snacks. They were super happy.
That was nice of you. What did the class do that was so great?
Every one of them got a B or higher on yesterday's quiz. They're usually my worst class so I was super proud of them and wanted to surprise them.
That's cool. I bet you're their favourite teacher now!
My class was so hungry today so I decided to give them all a snack during silent reading time.
What kind of snacks do you keep in your classroom?
I had individual bags of pretzels and juice boxes.
Do you supply those or do parents send them in?
The parents sent in the juice, but I supplied the pretzels.
I'm sure they loved it
I was playing hide and seek!
You are 45 years old!
I still love fun games!
Who did you play with?
I play all by myself!
Okay.. 
I was caught by Carson hiding in the wardrobe.
Why were you even doing that?
I was actually going to scare him for a video.
So how did he know you were hiding in there?
I waited a long time for him to come into the room. I got distracted and he saw the light from my phone.
You're not really good at playing pranks are you?
I had to drive Addison to work today at the school because her car broke down.
Did that make you late for work?
No, fortunately my job is only 5 minutes away from the school.
Hopefully her car can get fixed so you don't have to drive her anymore.
I don't know I kind of like spending extra time with her in the mornings.
Oh I didn't really think about that.
Remy threw me a big 21st birthday party bash yesterday.
I was invited, but couldn't come. I had to work.
That's too bad. Remy reached out to all my friends and invited them as a surprise to me.
Maybe I can make it next year.
Can you help me plan a party for Alex's 21st birthday this weekend?
Sure! I love parties! Who are we Inviting?
I already invited his friends, and they are all coming.
Good! That should be fun. What do you plan on serving?
Some finger foods and a lot of booze, ha ha
Perfect! I'll take care all the appetizers. I'll bring some chips too.
My 21st birthday party was really fun. Remy invited just about everyone I know and it was rocking'!
I wish I didn't live in a different state. We should have been celebrating together.
I know - I hope someday we live in the same place again. I miss hanging out.
Yes, it's not the same for me here. Oh well, I'm glad your party was a lot of fun. You're only 21 once!
Alex's cat ran away last week.
Oh no. I bet she is heartbroken.
She actually took a day off of work. I got off work too and help to put flyers up all over.
Did you guys ever find the cat?
No. The cat came home on its own one week later.
I bet Alex was really glad when it came back.
Remy got me exactly what I was hoping for.
That's always nice. Gifts can sometimes be disappointing.
Not this gift. I don't even know how he knew what I wanted.
You didn't leave any hints as to what you wanted?
I may have without realizing it. But it was very thoughtful to figure it out.
Remy seems like a very thoughtful guy.
You won't believe what Remy gave me for my birthday!
Hmm. Jewellery?
It was exactly what I was hoping for: diamond earrings!
Wow. Sounds like a special guy. Must be serious!
I'm beginning to think so. We'll see what happens.
Sounds like everything is going to work out!
It's nice that we get to cook a meal together.
Just like old times.
I missed doing this with you.
Ouch, be careful, my finger.
Oh I'm sorry, I didn't mean to cut you.
That's ok just go get the first aid kit.
I didn't mean for it to happen
It's okay, the cut isn't that bad
Yeah but I was chopping vegetables and I didn't look more carefully
It's okay I enjoy making meals with you
I'm glad you aren't mad
No way, it's fine, it's a small cut
I got cut too.
But my cut is deeper.
Yea this really sucks man.
Hope this doesn't cause permanent damage.
I don't think it will.
We'll see.
I impressed everyone at work with the Austin, Texas, procedure.
What the heck is the Austin, Texas, procedure?
Well, you talk with a southern drawl for weeks.
What does that do?
Well, everyone thinks you're slow-witted, so when you come up with a half decent idea, they think you're brilliant.
Oh.. I don't know if that's clever or stupid.
This is such a classic procedure I cant wait to try it out and impress everyone.
Oh I know I'm so excited to hear about it and see it
Yeah it really hits home and reminds me of so many things that I used to have as a child.  It's really great
yeah I get it.  Austin Texas must've been good
Most definitely Austin Texas is home
Of course
Kai said he was busy studying and could not go to the party tonight
Too bad, I love hanging out with Kai
Me too, but he is a very serious student and always puts work ahead of fun
I wish I had as much determination as Kai does
I know, he'll be very successful at whatever he does in the future
He's so smart I wouldn't be surprised if he finds a cure for cancer or wins a Nobel Prize
I can ask somebody else to go if Kai has to study.
Well you should ask Kai first. Don't take second hand information.
You are right. I will ask Kai first and let him know I understand if he has to study.
OK. Let me know what he says. My brother wants to go and could escort you if Kai can't.
That would be perfect. Kai would be able to study in peace and not be worried.
Exactly. A win-win for everybody.
I'm glad we went out that night instead of staying in.
Yeah, we don't usually hang out at bars.
Who knew, from that one night, I would meet my future husband.
It was fun when we were both single, but we weren't putting ourselves out there to meet anybody.
Now I'm married. You will be soon.
And our future children will play together.
I met her at a bar.
Which bar did you meet her?
The one on Karith Street. I normally stay home but that one night I wanted a drink.
That was fate. Not going there, you would not have met her.
Okay, the application for unemployment benefits is only two pages long.
Thanks for helping me with this. I've never been out of work before!
It happens to everyone eventually. Now, who was your last employer?
I used to work for McDonald's.
Okay, I'll fill out their information, and then I just need your social security number.
Okay, here's my social security card.
I wanted that book from Aubrey's library so badly, and she gave it to Sheila instead!
Can't you order a copy?
It's out-of-print, and used copies are going for hundreds of dollars unsigned.
Sorry to hear that.
Aubrey's copy is a first edition and autographed, too.
VERY sorry to hear that!
Yes, I finally found the key I was missing!
Great! Where was it?
It was on the floor in your closet, Tracy
Uhm why were you in my room looking in my closet, that isn't cool
I'm sorry I really needed to find that key
I understand but next time ask me and I will look in my closet, you had no business going in there like that!
I really thought she wouldn't mind.
I don't think she was mad that you wore her hat. She was mad that you were snooping.
I wasn't snooping. I was specifically looking for that particular hat.
All she wanted was for you to ask permission first.
I would have, but she wasn't around.
Look, I don't care. You should be pleading your case to her, not to me.
Hey, what is this dress doing in here?
Um, I bought it. I mean...yeah, I decided to buy it last minute.
I thought you said it was way out of your price range?
It was, but I used a credit card. Why do you care anyway? You shouldn't even be looking in my closet!
I'm looking for a dress to wear to the dance. Your clothes are better than mine. Usually you don't care. I'm sorry.
No, it's ok. Sorry I overreacted. You can borrow anything of mine. Even the new dress if you want.
l just took a wonderful, hot bath. I don't take many baths but I needed to soak my feet.
What's wrong with your feet?
I went walking in the woods yesterday and it's been awhile since I've done that. My feet hurt from that.
Oh, did you trip or stumble on the rocks or broken branches? I do that all the time and hurt my ankles.
I did step off a rock the wrong way. I'll bet that's why my foot is sore. My other one doesn't hurt at all, anymore.
I had a spa soak in my tub today.
That's so relaxing. Do you feel better?
I had been out hiking for so long yesterday that my feet really ached so it helped.
When your feet hurt, it seems like your whole body doesn't work right.
Exactly. The hot bath really helped and my feet are better too.
I'm glad you're feeling good now.
I went for a really long walk yesterday
Where did you go?
I was walking in the woods, I walked so much my feet still hurt today
Oh no, can you put your feet up for the rest of the day so they recover?
Actually I took a long hot bath and it helped a lot.
Oh yes that always helps, so relaxing.
I walked 5 miles through the woods yesterday and my feet were killing me.
Oh no! How is your feet now?
The nice, hot bath I took after really helped.
That's good. Maybe you should get a foot massage too.
I'm going to ask my husband later.
I took my bike to Bill's bike shop after I wrecked it, I couldn't figure out how to fix it!
Did the mechanic fix it?
Nope, they couldn't figure out the problem either
What are you going to do with the bike?
The mechanic is going to look again and if they can't fix it I will just sell it for parts or something
Well you have been talking about a getting a new bike anyway so maybe the timing was good after all
Hey Freddy, I am having trouble with my bike.
What happened?
I wrecked it and I literally cannot fix it at all.
Okay, I am not sure I could fix it either then. Have you thought about taking it to a mechanic.
Good idea, I will head over to one right now.
Hopefully they can fix it up for you!
I have to write a check for vacation.
I thought that Sasha already paid for it?
She did, but she put it on her card.
Oh, so you have to pay her back.
Yeah, for my half.
I guess that's only fair.
It was very nice of Sasha to pay for that.
She paid for the whole thing?
No, she put it on her card and then I gave her cash.
Yeah that was nice.
I needed a little time to save for the trip.
Have a great time!
Sasha and I booked a holiday together
Exciting!
I paid for have of it on our card I thought it was fair
Yeah don't make her pay for all of it!
Of course not, she works hard for her money
Have a great time
I have the money that you wanted for the payment
Thank you very much I really needed to pay off my credit card bill
You wouldn't want to get in debt again
I had such a hard time paying off my card last time that I never want to do it again
I hear you on that
How to make sure I take my time when reaching this.
It's very important that you do it right.
That's why it took me a long time but I did it.
Do you have to be patient for some of these things.
Do you know patience is not my best quality?
But you're learning how to be more patient day by day
Thank you for your help.
Am supposed to be the one to saying  thank you.
Coding is hard but with consistency you can do great.
I think I will work harder to hone this skill.
Yeah, that's the right energy.
All thanks to you...
I really want to reach the top of the pyramid and do it right this time
Did you take a ride up to the top last time?
Yes, and I felt bad that I couldn't do it myself
You always were really proud of your achievements even when you were a kid
Guess things never change
What is an astrology sign?
Well depending on when you are born you have a different astrology sign.
So what am I?
You are a Leo.
Oh, that's cool.
Here, let me show you all the signs.
This is the first time seeing a sign from a different country
It might take awhile to learn them all for your driving test
I'm sure if I study heard enough I can learn them all
Well, you have two weeks so you need to hurry up so you can get your license
I'll learn what that sign meant today.
What sign are you talking about?
The sign that we saw in that room at the end of the hallway.
How did you find out what it meant?
I asked Cameron and he knew.
So what does it mean?
I'm feeling rather good today!
Why's that?
I raised a lot of money for that charity down on Sycamore Street.
Oh, that's great! I know how much you appreciate their efforts to help those less fortunate.
I do and wanted to give more than I personally could so asked other for donations.
You should be proud!
You missed an amazing fundraiser this weekend.
I know it's gonna be great and I'm sorry I had to work.
It's all right, they'll be plenty more in the future.
Will they be as good as this one though?
Maybe not as good, but close enough.
How much money did you guys raise?
I'm so happy with the money I raised.
What did you raise it for?
A local charity that is close to my heart.
That sounds like a good cause.
I can't wait to give it to them.
They'll be happy for sure.
We finally made our goal
For the Animal Welfare Charity?
Yes now we can get to redo our whole vet area
That's great to hear
It really needed the upgrades
I've been meaning to come help out there as well
I love working as a veterinarian.
What's your favourite part?
Working with animals all day.  It's so rewarding.
When did you decide you wanted to be a vet?
When I was in elementary school.
That sounds amazing!  I wish I got paid to do what I love!
Even though I hate the work, I make a very good living doing roofs.
I get it that the money is good, but we were going to buy a boat together and so charter fishing trips.
We still can, if I can save up enough money for a down payment on a boat.
I don't want to wait that long and I see how unhappy you are.
Well, I cannot quit my job, roofing, I have too many expenses and the savings budget for the boat takes a big drain on my finances.
See, what I am trying to get across is that you are busting your butt at a job you hate and not making much progress at all towards Charter Fishing.
Will you be coming by the gallery tonight?
Of course, I wouldn't miss it for the world.
Great, I'm glad you'll be able to show up.
I really envy you, being able to support yourself by doing the art that you're so passionate about!
Thanks, I promised myself I would never work a mindless job I don't care for, and it's been working out great so far!
You're really lucky!
I am finally doing what I love for my job, drawing for a cartoon show.
I am really proud of you, after so many years you finally love what you do for work.
I know, I did so many jobs that made me hate my life and I am finally doing what I want.
Does it pay well?
The pay is good enough and it could even be less for all I care, I just love what I do now.
I am so happy for you and I hope it continues to bring you happiness as well.
Kai is in the hospital with COVID-19, and they don't expect him to make it.
I'm so sorry to hear this, Cameron. Are you close?
I was hired as his assistant in 2004, but I worked hard and we became close friends, so he made me a full partner a few years later.
How large is the company?
Forty employees, and it's more like a large extended family than a business.
This is going to be hard for everyone there if he dies.
I'm so happy to have worked for you for the past 5 years.
Me too, you have been the best assistant I've ever had.
Thank you, I'm so happy to hear that.
You are always  such a big help to me.
I try my best.  I enjoy my job very much.
I hope you will continue working for me for a long time.
Kai I really want to thank you for all you've done over the years as my assistant.
Wow! Thanks! I wasn't expecting that
How about I give you an extra week off for vacation?
Oh my goodness! I haven't had time off in years.
Maybe you could take a vacation?
That's a good idea. I'm thinking Hawaii.
I went to the comedy club last night as a comedian.
I love your jokes. Did the crowd like you?
I had the crowd laughing at my jokes last night.
That's great.
I quote another joke after and ended the night.
This is a great crowd.
Are they laughing at all your jokes?
They are eating them up.
I'm so happy for you because this means you'll probably get to come back to that club.
Definitely going to try to get some more nights here.
It also gives me a chance to come to one of your shows.
I was at the comedy club this weekend.
Was anybody good performing?
Yes, especially during the breaks when I said a few jokes.
You did?! That's great Kai; you're so funny.
After hearing them laugh at my jokes, I was brave enough to tell another one.
Good for you, Kai.
I went down from the mountain where I live to see some people who stopped in town.
They couldn't come up to see you?
Well everyone was gathered down in town so I just went there too.
It must have been nice to be around other people too.
Not really. I enjoyed my cabin in the mountains. I like the solitude.
That sounds amazing.
I have an important decision to make about a job.
What decision is that?
I have to decide if I am going to accept a job or not. I've talked to Tracy about it for an hour.
What did she say?
So what should I do Tracy, take the job 400 miles away or just sit this one out until something closer becomes available?
Man that is such a tough decision to make, are you leaning towards any side?
Well of course staying has more pros, I basically have to start over if I move, but the money is so much better!
True, maybe change would be a good thing, you told me last week you were bored with this town
Hmm good point, It's such an important decision, I'll sleep and decide tomorrow. You get some sleep too, we've been talking for an hour!
Don't take too long and don't overthink it, good night
I was determined to be on time.
That is a good trait to have.
Yeah I went to bed early and set two alarms.
Man you're not messing around!
I really am not.
Well good for you. Promptness is a great trait to have.
My roommate and I were fifteen minutes early for class today.
Wow, that's impressive, considering the fact that you two usually go to bed so late.
No, I was determined to be on time for this class. I went to sleep at 8pm and set two alarms for the morning.
But you usually sleep through your alarms.
Going to bed at an earlier time helped me feel much more awake and refreshed.
I guess that makes sense. I'm just glad I don't have to share the first fifteen minutes' worth of class notes with you today, since you were on time for once.
I have no idea where it went.
I'm sure you do, because you are acting so weird.
No I'm not.
Yes you are, and you disappeared for awhile earlier.
Okay, you can't tell anyone, but I hid it under the pool.
Really? I promise I won't tell, but you have to split the earnings with me.
I really don't remember where I placed the diamond.
How could you not remember Kai?
I don't know, I can't explain, it's us like it just disappeared.
That's impossible! You hid it Kai, where is it?
I told you, I have no idea!
You're lying to me Kai!
I can't believe I finally beat Jan in the match over the weekend. I really trained hard this year and it feels so satisfying to score higher than her!
I know! You've worked so hard this year. You did great at the match!
Thanks I definitely can't keep my guard down though. She is a tough opponent.
Yeah, really. Have you talked to your coach about what you can do to keep your game up?
I have a bit, but I definitely need to keep working with them on more sessions!
Ok! well good luck with your next game!
I was finally able to do a swim race and beat her.
Wow, I bet you're really excited and pumped up about it.
I'm so pumped, that I could go race her again right now.
How did you finally beat her?
I changed up my training routine before this meet.
I'm glad you finally beat her and shut her up from all that smack talk.
I knew I could beat you
You got lucky Sydney, you're not going to be on top for long
Don't take your defeat so lightly I've been training for a while
I'm telling you it was just luck
Well we go against each other next week, we'll see then
We will, and prepare to get crushed
I had a great birthday party.
Was it a surprise party?
No, I invited friends and planned it myself.
How come I was not invited?
You told me you were going to miss my birthday because of travel.
That was half a year before your birthday, though.
I'm pretty stoked for my birthday this year.
Are you going to have a party?
Yeah, I'm inviting a bunch of people.
Nice, let me know if I can help.
I don't need any help, but I was hoping you'd come to the party.
Oh sweet, I'll be there for sure.
I threw myself a big birthday party last week
Yeah?  That sounds fun, I wish I could have come but I live so far.
I know! I invited so many friends you would have liked.
Aw, I'm sorry I missed that.
I will make sure to invite you the next time.
Yes, let's plan for it.
I wanted to arrange a huge birthday party.
Everyone will have fun.
I have done my guest list and have called friends up.
Good for you. At what time did you want to have it?
Maybe 6 PM?
Sounds good! I am so excited!
I'm going to throw myself a big birthday party.
That's one way to get a party.
Oh, shut up.  Will you help me?
Of course, I guess you should start with a list of friends to invite.
I've got that right here.  I just need you to contact everyone.
I can do that.
Do you remember when I went for the interview for a secretarial position?
Yes, did you ever hear back from them?
They called yesterday and offered me the job if I want it.
What are you going to do?
It's a great offer and I think it could be a seriously good move for my career.
You better let them know soon then.
Well I applied for customer service manager but they offered me a secretarial position for starters
Well I guess you will have to keep looking
I actually might take this position, the pay is incredible and the hours fit my schedule perfectly
Oh perfect! Everything happens for a reason!
I'll try it, if I like I will stay, if not, I will continue job searching
Good luck! If anything it is something different for you
I am very happy with my students. They have successfully achieved the reading goals that I set for them.
That is awesome. How are you going to reward them?
I have bought a nice gift for the class.
You are such a good teacher and you certainly have a way with the kids.
I need to build up my savings account again.
Oh no, your impulse buying really has gotten out of control.
No, I just spent some money on a gift for my class after they attained their reading goals for the grading period.
Well, at least that's a good and honorable use of your money.
Absolutely, I feel like my class totally deserved the treat.
Well, I'm sure your generosity is appreciated.
You should have seen the students faces when I announced the pizza party!
Aw they didn't know about it prior to that day?
Nope, it was a reward for everyone meeting their reading goals for this grading period, they worked hard
You are a good teacher, that is such a good idea
It will keep them motivated for the next grading period, which surprise, I added 4 additional books haha
You are a good teacher but a sneaky teacher my friend, that is brilliant!
So my class was thrilled with me today.
What did you do?
I gave them a gift because they met their reading goals.
Well that was nice of you.
I know, I hope they continue to do well with their reading.
Well I'm sure they would with you as their teacher.
I was so proud of my second graders today! They met their reading goal for the grading period as a group!
That's great! Did you reward them with anything?
Yes, I gave each of them candy! They loved it and were so happy!
You're a good teacher. I wish you were my teacher growing up. My second grade teacher was horrible.
Aww, thanks! How bad was your teacher back then?
Well, he flew off the handle when I said yeah instead of yes. I'd say he was pretty bad.
I think we really need to pick it up since we need 20 points
Let's all try to figure out what we need to do so we can win
I think we should just try to play more offensive than defensively and get this game over with
I agree, lets pick it up and get this show on the road so we can go home
This is a competition. We are playing like we don't know what we're doing.
Everyone seems lethargic in this heat today.
The other team isn't playing that way. You can tell they want to win.
What should I tell the team to do on the next play?
We need to play hard or we should just give up and go home!
I'll tell them. Eye of the Tiger!
My team won a tough baseball game last night.
How did you guys end up winning.
Well, when it came down to crunch time, I told my team that they needed to go hard or go home.
That sounds very motivating.
Yes, it was. We really stepped up our game after that and were able to pull off the win!
Congrats on the win, I can't wait to make it to the next game!
If you want to be a part of this group then you must salute the flag.
It is nice to be in a team that helps make the world better, just when you say it sounds a bit like a cult.
People with like minded goals to change the world isn't a cult.
True, and working on to support nature and battle climate change sounds good to me.
Yes we need help where we can to make a better tomorrow.
All hands on deck.
Casey is so caring she never wanted to leave during her visit
She always loves to take care of others!
She looked at my vitals to make sure I was fine!
So good of her.
Casey was just here earlier.
Did you come to see you?
Since she's a doctor at another hospital, she just wanted to check on my vitals.
That was really nice of her.
Yeah. She said everything was fine.
It seems like it. You're more talkative than I expected.
I have been putting off visiting the doctor for so long because I am so scare.
What scares you about the doctor?
I don't know, I just think they are going to tell me bad news. It turns out that I had nothing to fear, everything was fine.
That's really good news. It always feels so good to realize you had nothing to fear.
Most definitely. I felt super relieved.
I am glad everything worked out well for you, and your health is good.
This spider bite won't stop swelling.
It has grown a lot, you should go to the doctor.
Nah, I'm sure I'll be fine.
You could lose your arm if it was the wrong type of spider.
Well, I guess you are right,  I had better get it checked out.
Better be safe than sorry.
Hey, those guys don't know me; maybe I can trick them for a bit.
What are you going to do?
I look like an overweight, middle aged couch potato, but as a professional offensive lineman, I'm quick as a cat over a short distance.
I've been listening to you guys brag about what great athletes you are.  Alright, my friend, show me what you can do.
O.K guys, first one to that fence over there wins.
Alright, Alex.
I am so happy today.
Anything exciting happening?
I bet some of them that I could beat them in a race.
And you won?
I guess they didn't know I was an athlete. I won the race easily.
I'm not surprised.
I bet them that I could win the race.
Did you win?
I did, beat them by miles.
You should have told them, who you were.
I bet I can beat you guys in a race.
I mean, I know you're a pro, but these are some fast guys.
Well, I bet you, I can beat them.
OK, you're on.
 I won!
Man, you really are fast.
I'm feeling on top of the world right now after winning that race.
But that race was just a local road race that was pretty insignificant for you.
Yeah, but I bet some strangers I could win it.
Did you tell them you're a professional athlete?
No, I didn't say anything about the fact that I'm a professional athlete.
Then you tricked them, which was unethical of you.
I saw this super cute dress on a banner.  I felt like it was would look perfect on me.
You mean the one on the cover? Yes, it's pretty.
I know right, the red would look good with my necklace!
The mall is like  5 miles away, lets go get it!
Honestly? Wow thank you so much!
My pleasure, off we go!
I'm so glad to be home! What an exhausting trip.
Welcome back! How'd it go?
Well it's taking a bunch of kids through Las Vegas for three days, it was so frantic. The class always enjoys it though, and that's what's really important.
Hey, maybe I'll volunteer to chaperone next time. I'm always up for a Vegas trip.
You say that now but those kids will keep you busier than you think.
Bring it on! No kid can keep me away from the poker table.
Finally back from the Vegas trip! Sorry I'm just getting back to you. Bus broke down in nowhere. It took us three days to get there.
This was your social psych class, right?
Yes. Ten wonderful kids.
How did it go?
They took thoughtful notes at both casinos. The tour around the city gave us all another perspective.
If I know you, I bet you expanded the lesson and helped those kids digest what they'd learned all the way back from Vegas.
I'm back! You missed a great Vegas trip.
Aw, don't rub it in. I'm still upset, that I couldn't go.
You, definitely have to come along on the next trip.
I'll be there. So your students enjoyed it?
One hundred percent. This was the first visit to Vegas for everybody.
Cool. I'm sure it was a memorable trip for them.
Here is what I can chip in with the rest of the money.
That is so great, our boss will be so happy.
I understand! he deserves this present.
He does, he is so nice to all of us.
Even the IT department loves him, he sure is charismatic.
He is a real role model thanks for the money.
Aubrey, that color does not suit you.
Do you think? I was thinking the yellow dress, with the green pumps?
I think you should try the dark purple dress on.
I do like that one, thanks for the help. I hope he likes this one.
You look like a goddess in this dress
You should really look at online sites when you are shopping.  It gives you cash back on things you purchase.
Oh wow.  What was that site called again.
Its Ebates.com  You will get around 4 or 5% cash back.
Okay lets go to that site then.  I would love some cash back.  That is like free money on something I was going to purchase anyway.
I use it all the time. So should you.
I agree.  I am going to bookmark that site so I can use it later.
Camping is really fun. It's so quiet out in the countryside.
Wait, I think I heard a noise.
Cut it out, Jesse. There's nothing out there.
No, I seriously think it's a stalker or something.
If you're going to make things up, I'm going to sleep.
Okay, okay, I was just trying to scare you.
what did you find?
'pretty sure I heard something
really?
yea man it was like a low growl
A Tiger!?
Maybe.
Jesse thinks he's so funny, but it's just getting old.
Did it really scare you when he told you?
Just for a second. But he was acting too suspicious.
Yeah, he gives himself away a lot.
I wish he would stop being so childish.
Yes, I think he is a bit child like.
I think I have the greatest lawyer ever.
Was your case finally resolved?
Yes it was, and the best part was, that I never went to court.
I always thought that you were going to have to at least show up once or twice.
So did I, but I was pleasantly wrong.
I'm glad everything is over and you can move on with your life.
I'm so scared about the case.
Is everything working out with the attorney I recommended?
Yeah, he is great. He took all my information and is making sure the case is in order.
I'm so glad. I am sure you are looking to when this is behind you.
Yes, then I will celebrate big time.
I can't believe Lee was able to get my case settled in such a short time.
Does that mean that you pay him less?
He gave me a flat fee before the case started. I'm just glad it didn't drag out.
I'm sure Lee is glad too. He made all that money and settled the case fast.
Yeah. It was money well spent.
How long before you get your settlement?
What are you looking for?
Shoes.
Ah.  What kind of shoes?
The black and white Nikes.
Here, I'll buy them for you.
Thank you, that is very kind of you!
Oh I like these shoes, the blue stripe is cool
I prefer the ones with the yellow stripe
Try them on, if you like them
They fit perfectly!
Ok I will buy those for you
Thank you so much!
I'm going to ask for a raise at work
I thought they already gave you one
Not yet, I have to ask for it
I know how hard you work, so I think you deserve a raise
I think so too, I hope my boss feels the same way.
Well good luck with that, let me know how it goes.
I am going to a dinner party.
Is it at a restaurant or at someone's home.
We are gathering at his house.
Is it a potluck party?
Yes, and part of my getting ready is to make soup to bring for the others.
I hope they like your dish.
I made my special Happy Soup today for the dinner party!
What is so special about the soup?
I put in olives, chives, and bacon for flavor!
That sounds delicious!
It's my mother's recipie.
I wish my mom could cook.
I'm just about ready to go to the dinner party.
What's the hold up?
I just have to make soup for my brothers and sisters.
Where are your parents?
They're out for the evening.  The kids can stay by themselves--they just can't make dinner.
Well, can I help? You need to hurry or you' ll be late.
I went to a dinner party tonight. It was really nice.
Who did you go to the party with?
I went with a colleague.
What did the kids have, pizza?
No, I made them a batch of their favorite soup and cheese bread. They were happy.
I can't wait until I have enough money to buy a new car.
Why do you need a car?
 I was bumming rides to work with my neighbor but I just started at a new place downtown. Now I have to take the bus every day.
I don't think the bus is that bad. At least you don't have to worry about parking.
True. But there's this weird guy who's always gets on one stop after me and he's been creeping me out.
I see, did you tell the driver.
I love the fact that I don't have to drive in traffic anymore.
How many buses do you have to take to work?
I just take one bus right now.
That's not bad at all, maybe I can do it some days
You just have to go on your phone and see how to get to your work by bus.
I'll do that right now.
Sorry I can't give you a ride.
The bus is o.k.
It's too bad my new job downtown takes me in the opposite direction.
I do miss talking to you in the morning.
I miss that too.
When I finish school, maybe I'll get a job downtown.
That new job that I got downtown, take me 1 hour to get to on the bus.
I gave you a ride on the days that I am working, since I already have to go that way.
That would be a lifesaver, I can throwing you money for gas.
It will be helping out both us.
I'm so close to being done with this project!
Really?  How did you get done so quickly?  I'm still stuck on page one.
I wrote a code that pulls the information directly from the invoices and puts it into a spreadsheet.
Wow!  That sounds great!  Any chance you could write some code for me?
Sure.  I am just about done with my project then I will have plenty of time to help you out.
Thank you!
I love using the computer to do my job better.
What is your job?
I work as a data scientist.
How do you use the computer to do your job?
I am able to use the computer to better analyze all my data more efficiently.
That's great that you have such a helpful tool.
Jordan lent me his bike to get home so I didn't have to walk today.
Wow that was really nice. How will you return it?
I will ride it back in tomorrow and he'll take it from there.
How is he getting there, though?
He's getting a ride from his dad so he'll ride the bike home when I give it to him.
That was great you didn't have to walk that far today.
Remind me to get Jordan's bike back to him tomorrow, would you? He loaned it to me because I was too tired to walk.
Sure, I'll remind you. Are you going to ride it back to his house?
Well, I was going to ask you about that. Would you pick me up from there, if I do?
Sure, just let me know ahead of time so I can plan for it.
I'm glad that I saved this steak for leftovers because I would have been starving.
to be honest, I was thinking about eating it earlier because it looked so good
I'm glad you didn't, because I wouldn't have had anything to eat since i havn't been to the store yet
would you like to go after you eat the steak, since I need to get a few things?
sure, let me finish this up really quick
I was starving after work yesterday.
What did you feel like eating?
I wanted something light.
What did you end up eating?
There was leftover steak on the table, so I ate that.
Steak is always a good choice when you're starving.
Aw that steak was so good. Haven't had steak in awhile.
Yeah we grilled out earlier.
It was good. Filled me up well.
I had some, too, it was good.
I saw a left over steak, that my dad made when I got home and I was so hungry that I ate it.
Do you think he left it out for you?
I guess so, because it was wrapped up and on a dinner plate.
Well that was very nice of him to do that.
It probably would have tasted better if I ate it right after it was cooked though.
Yeah, no one likes to heat up meat again.
I've always wanted to be a lawyer.
Do you think you'll get into law school? I heard it's hard.
When I got to college, I took school very seriously. I think I have a good chance.
I wish you the best of luck.
I have always wanted to go to law school ever since I was young
yeah I hope it happens for you
Thank you.  You have been such a great friend and are always supportive
of course, there is a lot to do out there for you, because you took school so seriously
yes,  there is a lot of things I will need to do on a day to day basis to get back up to the top
Of course, and I think that overall I believe in you and stuff too
I can't believe we'll be graduating this year. First four years of college flew by!
I know what you mean. It seems like we were just trying to figure out what to wear on the first day, remember?
I do, we put way too much emphasis on our clothes. I think I have a shot at getting into law school. My grades are there.
I really hope so. You've wanted to be a lawyer ever since I've known you.
I studied every law book I could get my hands on!
So you really think you'll get into Harvard Law?
Yes!  I have been preparing myself for years!
How much do you know?
Enough to help my uncle when he got a speeding ticket!
That's amazing, you are a genius!
I felt so enraged when I pulled Aubrey's hair!
Why did you do that?
She was angry and confrontational with me and I couldn't stand her!
But why get physical with her?
She was calling me names and threatening me, so I pulled her hair.
This is not healthy between two friends.
I looked at Aubrey angrily because of what she did!
What has she done this time?
She is annoying, I suddenly grabbed her hair and jerked her head back.
That will hurt, and it is not nice to do this to someone.
Yes it will probably, I did apologies to her later the day.
Can you pause the movie for me?
Why?
I wanted to pop some popcorn.
Is that what I smell burning?
What do you mean?
I smell something burning and there's smoke in the air.
Are you all ready to watch the movie?
I can't wait for it to start.
Do you all want some popcorn?
Yes, please.
I will go make some on the stove. I like fresh popcorn.
Thanks Remy!
I can't wait to have my party.
Me too. Waiting eagerly for the day.
It is going to be one in town with lots of foods and drinks.
So how are people going to gain access in since there won't be security at the entrance.
Yes you are right. This is the access code to the building so help me give to others.
Okay
The baker didn't know that I am a baker as well as a chef.
What did you do?
I measured out everything for the cake when I was in the kitchen.
I bet that shocked the baker?
He got a big laugh out of it. Says I can help him more often.
You just got yourself another job.
The cake turned out really well.
Did you make it yourself?
No, I helped out the baker when he was in the kitchen.
How did the cake end up tasting?
It tasted really good! It was chocolate cake.
Wow, chocolate cake is my favorite!
I helped my boss bake a cake today for the first time.
Oh that is cool, did he show you how he does it?
Yeah he is actually a really good pastry chef.
How long did it take to make the cake?
It was a three layer cake so it took a couple hours, and also had some elaborate decorations.
That sounds fun, send me a picture next time you bake a cake.
I really want to try to make a cake.
What kind of cake are you going to make?
I'm not sure, but definitely a very nice one.
I'm sure that whatever you make will be amazing.
Thank you! I really hope so!
I'm really in the mood for one now.
I crushed my lines in the play last night! All those weeks rehearsing paid off!
Oh this sounds good, I wish I could have been there but I had to work!
No worries! My mom filmed the whole thing!
I can't wait to watch it!
I'm already rehearsing for the next one!
I'll definitely clear my schedule this time!
The play went pretty well.
Did you mess up any lines?
Not at all. I had been repeating them over and over for weeks.
That's great to hear. That must have been nerve-wracking.
I thought the crowd and nervousness might take me out of my element, but it didn't.
I guess it's all habit and routine after a certain point.
I can't believe I didn't make any mistakes.
You delivered every line perfectly.
Thank you, I practiced so much but I was still nervous up there and thought I might freeze up.
I was so impressed watching your performance.
Did you record it?
I did, let's watch it together.
Wow I am surprised I was able to remember all these lines.  They were so complex too
yeah that performance was excellent.  I am surprised you remembered all of it
 I had spent weeks crafting and performing ways to remember it, and it finally worked
And it truly showed.  You were able to remember so much and the play was excellent
Thank you so much
you're welcome
I finally got the letter Skylar wrote to me.
Why did she write to you again?
We are part of a pen pal program.
Did you ever write back?
I did, but it took me a few days.
Those programs sound fun. I should join one.
Tracy is moving in today, she's down on her luck and needs a room.
That's so nice of you to help her in her time of need. Are you taking rent from her?
I told her she can pay me whatever makes her comfortable. She still needs money for bills and food.
You're an amazing friend. I know Tracy would do the same for you if you needed help.
That's why I help people, because when I need the help, I would want a friend to help me!
I know Tracy would help you, and so would I. If you're down on your luck, or I am, I know we have each other.
I finally asked Tracy to move in with me.
That's awesome. Haven't you been dating for a while now?
Yes, for about 2 years.
Well that's good timing.
I hope I've made enough room for her.
I'm sure she'll be excited.
I just finished cleaning out two drawers and half the closet for Tracy's clothes.
Why would you need space for her clothes?
I invited her to move in with me.
That's a big step.
We have been dating for a while now and she needs a place.
That's nice.
Sit down and play this game with me.
I have never played this one before.
It is not hard, here take my controller. I am going to go get us a snack.
I don't get this game.
How did you lose 20 lives in 5 minutes?
You'll never believe what Cameron did today
What did he do this time?
we were playing my favorite video game, and I let him use my avatar while I took a break
let me guess, it did not end well
it took Cameron less than 10 minutes to lose all the lives I accumulated over two days of play
That's such a Cameron thing to do.
I let Cameron play and he lost all the lives in 1 minute. It is probably a record.
Well he is not a gamer like you.
No, but he has played the game before.
He is probably just terrible at computer games.
I guess this must be it.
Whoa, what is happening with this dance circle here?
Oh,  they are showing us a new dance move.
Wow, this is a very fun and cool dance circle!
Yeah, I love the music they are pumping out and everyone's having fun.
This is such a fun way to spend a Saturday afternoon.
I love it and hope this happens every weekend!
I went to a dance competition yesterday.
Dance competitions are a lot of fun.
Two people were showing off their dance moves.
Who won the competition?
I crowded around them to watch their dancing. Other people watched too. It was a tie.
They both must've been very good dancers.
There were two people doing those dance moves in the mall today!
It looks amazing.
Yeah, it was really cool. I had to push into a crowd that was around them.
Their moves are very smooth and awesome.
It was impressive to watch them.
You never know what you're going to see at that mall.
I'm at the club watching some couple dance.
Are they that good?
Yeah they really are. I had to crowd in order to see them because so many people are watching.
Wow it's just like Saturday Night Fever!
Except that the music is a lot better!
True, true. Well if the guy turns out to be John Travolta call me back and I'll come right over.
I love my whole gang that I hang out with. There's this one guy, who drives me nuts.
What's wrong with him?
He just talks too much. I used to think it was just a bad habit, but he really doesn't ever want to listen, just talk.
So he just ignores you if you talk?
Yes. He finishes talking then leaves to bother someone else.
I can see why that makes you crazy. Time to stop listening and maybe he'll go away.
I'm not sure that Tracy likes me very much.
Oh, she probably does. She's just really quiet.
I think that's the problem. I talk too much for her.
That could be. I wouldn't worry about it.
I'm probably not going to change now anyway.
How does someone talk to much?
Are you referring to Taylor?
Yes! She talks so much that I can't hear myself think half the time!
She does talk quite a bit, but at least it is entertaining!
yes and no, it sometimes drives me nuts!
Well we need to let her know.
I don't think Tracy likes me
I get that feeling, too.
Seems like I'm her driving nuts
Can't win them all.
That's true.
Hey! Dude. Let's have a bet and race.
No you won't win.
I will bet everything that I will win.
You lost, Riley. I told you.
This can't be.
Better luck next time.
I bet you that I can beat you in a game of NBA hoops.
I bet you won't.
This is tougher than I remember.  I haven't played this game since high school.
See I told you that you couldn't beat me.
Okay, you win.
Better luck next time.
I'm totally upset, I am not a good loser!
Tell me what did you lose?
I lost a bet with my friend on a one on one basketball game
Sorry to hear thay Riley! You're still awesome
Thanks! It just makes me want to not play again
Don't worry, next time you'll win!
It's been fun playing at the coffee shop.
Seems like you really enjoy it.
I do. I think it's one of the things I'm going to have to experience to become a famous guitarist.
I got to go watch you one of these days.
Please do. I need all the support I can get.
I hope some music agent sees your set.
I got my first guitar gig at the coffee shop.
Could you be satisfied with being locally famous?
I've always wanted to be famous, more than just locally.
Think about it this way. Locally famous is not that different than nationally famous since most of your life is spent in local areas.
That is an interesting way to look at it.
If you move away, you can restart that attempt at local fame.
Hey come see me play tonight, I'll be at the coffee shop on the corner of 5th and Fern
I'll be there, is it that tiny little place in the corner with the red brick?
Yep that's the place, I take any exposure I can get!
I understand, lot's of famous people were discovered in little shops
Yep and I want to be the most famous guitarist in the world!
You will get there! I'll be there for support, and free coffee, do I get free coffee
I didn't mean to insult you.
But you had no problem saying it initially though.
Well that was because I just wasn't thinking. I thought it was a compliment.
Well you should think before you say things.
What I mean to say is that I think you are an intelligent person.
This is sweet, thank you.
There's no way that was meant as an insult.
Sometimes you phrase words that can be interpreted in a different way.
No, I meant it as a compliment and there's no way they could have misinterpreted that.
Some people have no sense of humor, I wouldn't make a big deal out of it.
I am trying not to but it's frustrating.
Let them think whatever they want, you meant it as a compliment.
I had an awkward moment at the school today.
what happened ?
I meant to compliment my classmate, but most of students found my statement offensive. I had to paraphrase it.
Happens to the best of us.
I lost my shirt yesterday.
Where did you lose it?
It was ripped off my body while I was crowd surfing.  I did not notice it at first.
When did you realized your shirt was gone?
This morning when I was only wearing my sports bra.
At least you had something on.
Yesterday I saved the day at the office
What happened Kendall
The IT administrator did not know how to work on the client's system, but I had an idea and I fixed it
You are a genius
Well, you could say that again. The client was happy and I was awarded by the CEO
You are lucky Kendall
I've been in the finance business for years, so Cameron came to me when he was ready to invest.
He told me he was making extra money at his new job and was ready to invest. I'm glad he came to you.
He told me you recommended me since I have 3 degrees in finance and money management. You are always bragging on me!
You are the best person for the job! How is his portfolio doing?
I can't really give you details, but he's going to be happy with his next statement.
That's great! He's going to be so happy with your work!
There you go, are you happy with the way I handle your finances?
Yes, very well. Your experience and multiple degrees are really paying off.
Yes, I really worked hard to get to where I am now.
And is working not only to your advantage, but to other people as well.
I am glad. Thank you very much.
No, I should be the one thanking you. I appreciate all the help.
We're stopping at the first restaurant we find.
Are you hungry.
I'm starving. I worked all day and haven't eaten.
Where do you want to eat?
I'm so hungry, just stop at the next restaurant, please.
Well there is a nice restaurant coming up on the right.
I think I paid way too much for this meal.
Why do you say that?
Because I went to the store hungry. You should never go to the store hungry.
No, that's one way to overspend for sure.
The deli had a broccoli salad that looks good I asked for a big tub of it and it was like $15. And I had sliced turkey breast and they charge by the pound that was like $15.
$30. that's a bit much when it wasn't like a restaurant or anything.
I was starving after work.  I walked into the restaurant and really didn't care what I ate or how much anything cost.
I've been like that before.
The waitress asked what I wanted to eat after she handed me the menu.  I just started reading down the list.  She was like those are all desserts.
That's funny.  What did you end up having for dinner?
I ordered pasta, a whole 12-inch pizza, slice of cheesecake, cheese burger and coke.
You ate all that by yourself?
I am literally so hungry right now.
When was the last time you ate something?
Literally yesterday, I know it is  terrible.
Why are you in the mood for now?
Literally anything! I just want to eat.
Okay fair enough, let's grab lunch at the place around the corner.
There was a nail in the tyre.  I still have to drive home so I didn't take any detours.
Did you make it home?
I did, but I was thinking the tyre would pop.
Take it to the shop and have them mend it.
I might need a new tyre.  The tread is worn on them.
I this case, please get new tyres.
I hope that the nail in the tyre doesn't give me a flat
you can always patch it up with some fluid from Walmart
Really, how much does it cost?
I think it is only around 10 dollars for a bottle
I guess that isn't too bad though
Hey Austin, what's up? I heard you got a cool painting at the art exhibit.
Yes I did. I even spent a few minutes with the artist, too.
You know, I never saw that one or if I did I don't recall it. Can you describe it to me? Is it a watercolor?
It's impressionist, but with a modern twist. It's pretty incredible, with a huge variety of colors. You have to see it.
I feel horrible for working so late. I need coffee now.
I'm really sorry you are feeling bad.
Well, I would not have if you had done your share of the work earlier. I had to finish everything myself.
I see you are in a bad mood. You know I had to leave early because my dog got hit by a car.
Yeah , I know. I'm sorry I'm so irritable. How is your dog?
He is ok. He was lucky not to be hurt too badly. More scared than anything.
I'm working on image making for Tracy. I had to change up all of her social media accounts.
That seems like a lot of work.
I know, but I am her publicist. I did get a PR person to work with us, though.
Oh that's good.
Yes I have a specific idea in mind and need a professional.
That sounds like a generally good plan.
I held Aubrey's feet to the fire because I want her to understand the rules.
You are normally so lenient with Aubrey. What did she do?
She came in an hour after her curfew. We had an agreement about curfews.
What was your agreement?
That if she was late and didn't have an excuse, she would lose her driving privileges for a month.
So you took the car from her?
I think I need to continue being tough on Aubrey.
What did Aubrey do this time?
It was a slight rules infraction.
Do you think you're being too harsh?
No, small infractions become large infractions if not dealt with.
I guess it's smart to think in the long term.
I need to order some fabrics in.
Did you get all the information you need for the order.
I did, most of the materials are for children clothing.
So there are children movies bases?
some yes, should I ordered some other pattern as well?
Not necessarily.
I had a few confusion regarding the orders, today
that must be hard having to follow direct orders.
it was hard but  the person of the cloth knew that I did well
I am sure that you will be a great part of them no matter what
I hope so I have been aiming for this.
I know you will do well.
I tried my best to keep this gift a surprise for as long as I could.
How was she able to see it?
My phone rang and I got distracted and she turned around and saw it behind my back.
At least you were able to hold out until the last possible minute.
That's all I asked for.
Did she love the gift?
Hello there,  you left your purse on top here!
Oh thank you so much! I totally forgot it was on there, I would have just kept driving
Not a problem!
Can I give you a tip for helping
Thank you so much, this is very kind of you
Not at all, thank you for being so kind!
I had to flag down a car earlier today.
Did the car almost hit you?
No, the driver forgot their purse on top of the car and they drove away.
They're lucky you saw it.
I didn't know I was so out of breath until I had to chase that car down.
Why didn't you just hop in your car and follow them.
By the time I would have gotten in my car, they would have been long gone and I would have been stuck with their purse.
How far did you run before they noticed you?
About a mile and a half.
I bet they appreciated what you did.
Today was a good day at work. Our quarterly numbers are looking great.
That's wonderful! We should celebrate.
I called the employees into the afternoon staff meeting to let them know what a great job they were all doing.
Where do you want to celebrate?
All of my employees will be joining us tonight for a celebration.
I'll make reservations somewhere since we will have a lot of people.
I feel great.
Why?
This morning the quarterly reviews and looking great.
You should tell the staff in a meeting this afternoon.
The last time I saw the boysy, was three years ago.
You were gorgeous and the boys just turned their heads on you. I remember that.
I'm surprised you still remember that.
Of course I do.
That was back then. I am older now.
You will always be lovely to me.
I had a little fun with the boys.
They had not seen you in a long time.
That was three years ago and I was a little girl.
And now?
Three years later I am nearly grown up.
you all grow up too fast, love.
I'm so glad that I found you
 Med too, I don't know what my life would be like with out you
I agree, I wish we met earlier
We still have lots of time ahead together
I can't wait to go on all the holidays with you
How about we look at one now?
I meet my ex-husband for lunch tomorrow!
I didn't know you were married before!
Yeah, I got married right out of high school to my grade-school sweetheart.
Sounds romantic. How long did that last?
It lasted for 5 years, but we are so different and agree it is best to part as friends
It is nice that you still seeing each other
Hey, it's me! My phone died while I was the butcher's, so I'm calling from a payphone.
Oh, I was wondering why I didn't recognize this number. Were they out of lamb chops?
Almost, I got the last ones. Was there anything else we need?
I picked up some bottles of wine earlier so I think we're set.
Cool, I'm going to head back now.
Can't wait! That butcher has the best lamb!
I am really glad I was able to get everything taken care of at the butcher shop!
What did you have to do there?
I had to pay for my last order of meat, and put in my new order. It ended up being more complicated than I thought. After that I had to go call my dad to let him know.
Oh wow, sounds like quite the ordeal but I am sure you are glad to be done. How did the call go?
It went well although I had to call on a payphone since my cellphone broke.
I didn't know they even had payphones anymore! Not sure I would know how to make a call on one.
These drinks are tasty.
You look like you are having a great time.
I feel like I'm on top of the world in this bar.
yeah, everyone said you were a blast last night.
I cant believe how drunk I got last night
you got up on the pool table and started dancing with two girls
wow, I don't even remember that. I guess I had a great time
you still owe the bartender twenty dollars on your tab.
In this case I should go and pay that off
I went to an Irish Pub last night and had a blast.
I have never been to one. What's it like?
Very Lively. The people were very friendly, they laughed at my stories and everyone said I was the life of the party
That sounds like something out of a movie.
It really was something like that. There was a big group of people gathered in a corner laughing, cheering, toasting
That must be where the movies got it from then.
When I got home from work, my dogs were outside barking like they were starving to death.
Did you forget to leave hard food for them?
I don't know - I might have. Anyway, I grabbed some cans and fed them. They are happy now.
That's good. A happy dog means a happy human.
I noticed the dog was hungry, as soon as I got back from work.
She probably didn't eat anything the whole day.
I heard it barking outside
Has she eaten now?
I got the tin of dog food and brought it outside.
Good!
Hi, I'm home from work. I got off a little early.
That's a nice surprise, I'm glad you're home. I let the dogs out about a half an hour ago and they won't stop barking.
I hear that, have you fed them yet today?
No, not yet, I was just about to take them some food and water outside before you walked in the door.
I still have my shoes on so I can do it. Is the tin of dog food still in the storage closet?
Yes it is, than you. Just go out the back door to feed them but be careful, they may jump on you to try and get to the food before you set it down.
Come on in.  Good to see you.
What are you up to?
I just got home and the dogs were barking in the yard.
Happy that you were home?
They were happy that someone might feed them, so I went outside and gave them a tin of dog food.
Well, food will make most any dog happy.
I am so impressed by Ash's oil painting.
Was it really that good? Sorry I do not understand much about art.
I guess you just don't have an eye for art because Ash won an award for that painting.
Well then I guess the tuition at that fancy art school was worth it.
I'm sure Ash and his family believe it was. They are proud also.
I should be proud that our friend has done something so awesome.
Ash, were did you learn to paint like this. You're a natural Picasso!
Well, Picasso was great, but I am no Picasso.
You are great. You got into the most prestigious art school in the country. That says a lot.
I know but I had connections and some great recommendations.
I just don't understand how you do it.
Quite easy. I used a computer and this paint by numbers app on my phone.
I admire your intricate work of oil paintings.
I went to an art contest and went to a famous art school.
it does pay out to attend a good art school
Yes, I agree, the tutors were really good and we had lots of great artists visiting and give us lectures.
That's amazing.
So glad I god a chance to go to this school.
I admire your work of art, and I think it has a very unique style
thanks you so muich,  the art school I went to help me to develop myself as an artist
what really inspires you when you start to create a piece?
a lot of it comes from my own experiences and some from just the vibes I get from the environment around me
your work seems very abstract but with a lot of emotion coming through
well this particular set does but I also dabble in real life painting as well
I took my wife's high heels to the tailor to be fixed today.
Why didn't you just get new shoes?
These shoes were really expensive.
How much were they?
It costs around $500. So it makes sense to get them repaired.
Definitely. Do not throw those away.
I had to bring my partner's heels in to the tailor today.
Was something wrong with them?
Yeah, the heel was coming off and it needed to be repaired.
The tailors around here are really talented. They should be able to fix it.
Jan coordinating with Aubrey made the store's event a success.
That's perfect.
I'm so glad, I connect Jan and Aubrey.
Yeah, that was a brilliant idea.
I heard you needed Jan's name so you can set up this successful event
thank you, I needed that so bad and now I can use her expertise to make the show better
I think she can help you advertise so you can get more people to attend
i really hope so or else my boss is going to kill me if I don't
I gave Jan's number to Aubrey, so she could help with the big grand opening.
What a good idea.
Jan is the best event planner.
That museum opening last month, what she did was amazing.
It was, that is what made me think if her for Aubrey.
Well, goo, I hope the store opening goes well.
Hey Jan, I gave your name to Aubrey so you could help coordinate the store party.
Sounds good. I already have a menu in mind.
I told her of your belief in the power of food.
The way to a customer's wallet is thru their stomach.
She loved that line. Food is the great persuader.
And if the food doesn't get them, the alcohol will.
We just got back from sailing. It is so fun! You should go with us sometime!
I know how much you love to go. I'm a little scared to get onto boats.
Really? Why?
I don't know. I'm always scared they will move from the dock and I will fall in.
Oh, I am actually the one in charge of tying our yacht so that it stays put!
Maybe I will go sometime!
Lee was not paying attention and where he was going to jump off the pier was shallow.
He never looks to see what is around him before he does it.
I had one second to pull him back, before he jumped.
Good thing he had you there to save him from hitting he head in the shallow water.
This water is so beautiful! I love it.
Yes, I  think I'm going to jump in.
Wait, you need to stop! It's really shallow here.
Oh wow, thanks for stopping me. That would not have been good.
Anytime! Look out before you do anything.
Yes, I need to be more careful.
I had to give a class presentation last week for school and I was so nervous.
I am sure it went fine. What did you present on?
I talked about my love for nature and you are right it went great!
What grade did you get?
I actually got an A on it. Probably because I love the topic.
It's important to talk about what you love.
I am just so relieved that my presentation at class went so well.
You weren't nervous at all?
I was. But after a little while, I just focused on giving the presentation as well as I could.
The teacher must have given you a good grade.
He did. He said that I did a great job.
I'm glad to hear it. It sounds like you really worked hard on it.
Man, I gave Quinn a massage and did some stuff to help him loosen up his muscles. He was really tense.
I love doing those kinds of exercises.
Quinn had so much tension in his shoulders. I don't know how he even moves. I pulled his arms back to help that.
Did he respond to the massage?
Oh yes, he was much more loose by the time we were done.
I have a dream of climbing the highest mountain in my homestate of North Carolina.  I have been prepping for this event for a while now.
Really, what mountain is it?
It is Mount Mitchell.  It is the tallest mountain in the Appalachians.
That sounds cool, when are you going to do it.
Hopefully this fall, I will be fit enough to climb it.  I have been working out a lot to prepare.
I wish you luck my friend.
She loved the song I sang for her today.
I had heard about that! I wish I were as creative as you.
Yeah well it has taken a lot of practice.
I am sure it was a memorable experience.
It was! She recorded the song as well.
That is great, I will have to listen.
I wrote a love song and sang it for my girlfriend at the Gold Bar.
You are a good singer. She must have loved it.
She was screaming and crying. You would have thought I proposed.
Well she probably thought it was close enough. She knows you are serious now.
I just wanted to make her happy .
I sang at the bar the other night.
What did you sing?
I sang a love song, and my girlfriend was there.
How did she react?
I looked at her the entire time, and she started to cry.
this is so romantic.
I wrote a love song and don't know who to sing it to
You can sing it to us of course! were all your friends and want to help
alright, I plan on singing this song in front of my girl friends too.  I think they will be really pleased
yes, I am sure she will be happy
I hope this is a good song
I am sure it is
I can't wait to sing the song for my girlfriend.
What song is that?
It is the one that I made for her. I'm so excited.
Is it a love song?
It is actually. I hope she will love it.
I'm sure it'll be great.
I hate this job so much. I wish we had never even cheated.
Me too. This trash is gross. I can't believe what people throw on the ground.
Last week, I found dirty socks. It was so gross.
Hopefully this is over soon! I feel like we've done our fair share for cheating
Me too. Maybe we should ask the teachers when we can be done
I'm still afraid of Mrs. Harris
Jan and I finally finished that punishment we got for cheating, picking up trash .
You deserved it for cheating on that test. It was not the right thing to do.
Everybody cheats. They were just making an example of us.
I don't think everyone cheats. You have to have study harder
I believe you are right, I need to pay more attention at lessons.
I cant believe that there is so much stuff here for us to do.
I know! It is so important that we pick up the trash, and learn a lot from this experience
yeah that is so true
I cant wait to be done with this type of punishment.  It really is embarrassing
It really is. 
let's keep going and get it done with
This is just great.
How embarrassing, picking up trash.
I guess we sort of deserve it.
I don't know.  What does picking up trash have to do with cheating on a test?  They're just trying to shame us as a warning to other students.
Well, we could have been kicked out of school.
Yes, I suppose.
Did you see all the toys that kid had, so lucky!
He did have a lot, did he let you play with some?
No, so I took one of the blue toys!
You stole it? Did he notice?
Yeh he told the teacher and she scolded me and made me give it back
Good, you deserved that, you can't take someone else's stuff!
Laundry is the worst thing to do.
Well you have to do it sometime.
I never wash my clothes.
Well you might start to smell and it will not be pleasant.
Probably, I just do not like laundry.
I show you, it is not that hard.
I can't get my suitcase shut, can you sit on it so I can zip it up?
Yeah, sure. Wait...what is that smell? Did you forget some dirty clothes in here from your last trip?
No, I don't think so. It's probably just my clothes. I don't exactly do laundry.
You never wash your clothes?!
I just really, really dislike doing laundry. My mom used to do it for me but now that I'm on my own, I just sometimes Febreze my clothes.
Seriously, Alex. We need to go to the laundromat. And I mean right now.
I hate laundry, its the worst.
What do you do for clean clothes?
I just buy new clothes all the time.
What a waist that would be.
Its better than washing laundry, I just really dislike washing laundry.
You should just get laundry detergent it is cheaper than new clothes.
In college all my roomies would laugh at me when I came home with new clothes from the walmart every week
Why did you buy so many clothes?
I really dislike laundry, it is my worse chore so when I ran out of clean clothes I would just go buy more
This is a waste of money. Let me show you how to do laundry, it is not that bad
It is sometimes my cloths shrink or colors faded off
The label tells you what best to wash it at, so it won't shrink!
I am so happy I got to go out last night!
That's great, where did you go?
We went dancing at the new salsa spot
that's awesome, who was with you?
I was with Robin and some of my other friends
nothing better than a night of dancing with the girls!
Would you like to go to prom?
 I don't know.  Why?
I heard you didn't have a date and neither do I.
Well we are good friends.  I don't see the harm in it.
Awesome.  Find a nice dress and I'll give you the pre prom details via text.
Okay! Thank you
I believe in luck.
May I ask why?
Well, I found a four leaf clover and got a job offer the same day.
That's straight luck right there.
That's what I think!
Awesome good for you!
Guess what, I got a new job!
Wow, congratulations! Where are you working now?
At a bank. Want to know something funny?
Sure. Tell me.
I found a four leaf clover that day. It probably gave me good luck for the job.
Well, it very well could be.
Guess what happened to me today?
What happened, anything good?
Yeah, I found a lucky four leaf clover in the yard this morning.
How do you know it was lucky, and not just a regular four leaf clover?
Well, I got news later that I got that job offer that I applied for last week.
Wow, maybe it is a lucky four leaf clover.
It must be my lucky day, I just got offered an awesome job
Why do you think it was luck, maybe it was your skill that brought the job offer
It could be my skill, or it could be the lucky four leaf clover I found earlier today
Wow, I've never seen a  four leaf clover, I didn't think they were real
Neither did I, until I found this one in the park
Maybe you should buy a lottery ticket too just to test your luck
I found a four leaf clover earlier, and after I found it I got a call from that company.
Did you get a job offer?
I did, this clover must be good luck!
How exciting congratulations! Are you going to save that clover?
I think I will put it in my wallet with me, so I always have a bit of luck.
That is so smart.
Sorry Tim, you cant go out
Why mommy its so nice out
I know all the kids are staying in now, there has been a bad man around
I will be carefull, I promised
No Tim this is serious, until the police say its safe you have to play inside
In this case, can Mike come over though?
This guy was huge. He had scars all over his face, bushy black hair, he was angry and was disheveled.
Well Robin, please keep the kids inside. Thanks for the info.
Oh, one more thing he really smelled bad, as well.
Thanks, just stay put. We got it under control.
He was also grunting and for some reason his skin was green.
Really? Just stay in. I will radio in for back up. Mr. Banner, please come in!!
I'm so scared about the recent happenings in our neighborhood!
What event is occuring in your neighborhood!
Several people have seen a dangerous man lurking around the neighborhood!
You should take all necessary preventive measures.
Yes! I now keep all the children inside the house
Please do till it is safe to go out!
Many people have seen a dangerous man lurking around the neighborhood.  I keep the children indoors so they don't get hurt.
Did you call the police?
I did. They said they would patrol the area.
Put Freddy in the front yard so he'll bark and alert you if anyone approaches.
That's a great idea.  I'll do that.
Stay safe everyone.
Hey I just recently moved in.
I see so you are new to the city.
Yeah I got to the city not so long ago.
What do you think of the city so far?
It is nice so far, since I made some friends in the area.
Oh nice so you settled in well.
I really love that I moved to Miami.
That's a long way from New York. Isn't it really hot there?
It is but the beaches are really close. It's a very party like atmosphere.
Don't you miss your family?
I do, but I've met some great people and have made a few close friends.
Well, I miss you. I will over to see you.
I thought I cooked this long enough but mine is sort of cold.
Yeah, same with mine.
The oven is still hot, I'll get them back in there for 15 minutes or so
You're the chef my friend
The food looks great but cold.
Another 10 min would be good
Oh no, the food is still cold!
Why did you serve it cold?
I thought I cooked it long enough!
What kind of food was it?
It was steak!
You need to cook it properly.
How is everything for you guys?
Well,  our food is cold.
Oh my, I do apologize. I will get you a new order and compensate you for your meal.
Thank you very much.
No problem, I sincerely apologize for that.
I had a really interesting date with Austin.
Austin is lovely. Did you have a nice time?
Dinner was nice and we went for a night cap at the bar.
So it doesn't seem so bad.
We got out of the bar at 1am and he insisted to take me to his home to meet his parents.
I hope they were nice.
Finally some good news! I actually had a really nice date last night.
Good for you, girl. What'd you do?
Nothing special - just some drinks and dinner after work. But the guy I went out with, was just really nice and pretty funny.
It's always a good sign when the guy can make you laugh.
Now I'm hoping he calls me, again. You know how guys are.
He will, I bet he had a good time, too.
I was a little scared in trial this morning.
Why were you scared? You've gone to trial before.
The person was a powerful business person and many people were afraid to challenge him.
Is it safe to challenge him?
He'll be in jail for a long time for the crime he did.
I have to bring some secrets out of the closet in regards to this business manner.  It has been very important and I am accusing this person
I was afraid to challenge that powerful business person because they were so threatening, but you do have the courage
Yeah it was truly a crazy time for me
You'll definitely be well know for bringing this person to trial and restoring some sort of justice
Or at least attempting to right?
Correct.  I am proud of you.
My dog, Maggie, was lying down on the floor a lot.  She was acting differently so I took her to the veterinarian.
Hope she's okay.
The vet says she has an infection and prescribed some antibiotics.
I remember Maggie as full of energy.  She rans around so fast at the park.
She usually is very active that's why I was concerned when she wasn't.
I hope after she's done with her antibiotics, she'll be her normal self again.
I was starting to get really worried about him. He seemed so uncomfortable.
Aw, your poor dog. It's so tough to see them in pain, isn't it?
It's terrible. All he wanted to do was lie down. That's not like him.
The worst thing is they can't tell you what's wrong. They just suffer.
Well, I couldn't stand it anymore. I took him to the vet finally.
I don't blame you. I hope they were able to figure it out.
I'm really worried about him.
Why, what's wrong with him?
He's so tired all the time lately. He doesn't even want to go for walks anymore.
Wow that is weird. He loves going for walks! You should take him to the vet.
I did this morning. He's still there actually. They're running a bunch of tests on him.
Well I sure hope he's okay. Let me know as soon as you find out anything.
I was talking to Kendall and trying to get her spirits up. Now I think that it was a mistake?
Why was it a mistake? Kendall's a nice person.
Because by the time I was done, Kendall was telling me, she didn't need my advice and she was fine on her own.
This is not very nice of her.
That's what I mean. She got this big head and told me to get off.
I told Kendall that she is so beautiful with that new hair cut. She really  believed me and now is going around like she is all that.
That wasn't nice. If you did not mean it.
Well, I was just having fun. Seriously, her hair cut wasn't bad, but it's her problem if every compliment goes to her head.
Well, at least she has high self esteem.
I just can't talk to Kendall lately. She seems really stuck up and thinking that she's better than anyone!
Maybe explained to her what how you feel?
What do you suggest I shall do?
Not anything bad. Just talk to her about how she's been acting lately. Tell her that she's turned into a stuck up bitch.
That's good advice. I try not to be too blunt
That might be a good idea. I lose a lot of friends by being so blunt.
I really hated doing all that work!
Why is that? Did it just feel too much?
It really did, and I had to quit my own business.
Well I hope that you find something else.
I will, thanks! I just couldn't do that anymore.
Yes, I mean, it didn't sound fun at all.
I'm launching my own business next week.
Really? When did you decide to do that? I thought you worked for Tracy.
I decided last week to start my own business, after I quit working for Tracy.
Oh why did you quit, I though you like it there.
No, she forced all her work on me. It was a nightmare.
I started my own business.
You quit working for Tracy?
Yes, finally. She was having me do her job and I wasn't getting any credit for it.
When do you open?
I am not sure yet, but I will let you know.
Thanks, looking forward to it!
Kai, I owe you an apology for my impolite behavior the last time we met.
No problem. I look forward to hearing your ideas today.
Thanks. I do have some thoughts about the NAZ ad.
Noted.  Good morning, everyone.  Let's get started, shall we?  Anybody just bursting with ideas for the new ad campaign?
I have one or two suggestions.
That's great, Addison.
Well, we have a long meeting with a key client.
Okay Addison, I have the slides.
Thank you Kai, apologies for my behaviour last time. Thank you for doing the presentations.
Not a problem.
 Can you all do see the slides via Zoom?
Sure.
I am so glad I got home just in time, earlier today, to watch my favorite show.
Why were you running late?
I slipped on the ice walking home, and sprained my knee so I had to walk slowly.
You think you need a doctor to check it out?
No, it's just swollen so I am going to just deal with it.
Well if you change your mind I will give you a lift to the doctor.
you won't believe I fell down on my way home
oh, are you alright, why were you in a hurry?
Yes I am alright, I was in a hurry to watch a show.
You should be very careful
Don't mind me, I will be fine
well, take care of yourself
I scraped my kneed yesterday.
How did you do that?
I was running home to catch my TV show and just tripped.
I'm sorry, are you alright.
Yes, it was fine. I got up and was able to make it home in time for the show by walking.
Oh, well, I'm glad it worked out in the end.
Oh my gosh, I am so glad I studied last night!
Why do you say that?
We were doing test review in class, and the teacher asked me a question and I was able to answer correctly!
That is awesome, I am sure the teacher liked that!
I am sure it was surprise, I usually do not have the correct answers
Well good for you, now maybe you will study more often!
My teacher called on me to solve this math problem.  I was so nervous but I got it right.
That's good.  You've been getting tutored in math right?
I think the tutor has really helped me.  The problem was similar to one we had for homework.
Sounds like you are improving in math.
I am excited about that.  Math has never been my strong subject.
You keep at it and you'll excel at it.
I felt so proud of myself for answering the question correctly.
That's awesome! Soon you'll be the teacher's pet.
I highly doubt that. It just felt amazing to know the correct answer in front of the class.
It seems like your teacher favors you the most.
I don't think so, it just so happens that I study hard.
You are an inspiration Remy.
I saw a movie last night that made me laugh so hard.
What was it? I could use a good comedy.
That's the thing, though. It wasn't a comedy. Just so bad, you had to laugh.
I take it bad acting, bad script and terrible director.
You got it...everyone was laughing.
I'm sorry to laugh, but this movie is so bad.
It's okay. I understand what you mean.
I'm so sorry that I picked this film for us to watch.
What did you think it was about?
I heard a movie review saying that it was the best movie ever made about restaurant culture.
So you were fooled by that review. Make sure to tell me who the reviewer was so I can avoid reading their stuff.
Oh my goodness! I can't stop laughing!
The movie isn't supposed to be funny.
I can't help it. It's impossible for me to stop laughing.
You really can't stop laughing, I can see.
Yes, I do. This movie is hilarious and it doesn't even mean to be.
I see what you mean.
This is such a funny part in the movie, even though it's not meant to be.
Yeah, the acting here is pretty bad.
I agree, they need to recast the whole casts, and the story make no sense
The writers probably overlooked how the audience would perceive it.
Well, it does give me a good laugh, even if it's unintentionally funny.
I agree and think it's worth the trip to the theatre to watch.
This sewing machine was the best way to make use of these old scraps.
I see you have some fabric and a few t-shirts but what are you going to make?
I  threw everything together to make a quilt with all the loose material
If you need some more materials just let me know and I can get some for you
I paid attention in class for once.
Why?
Because I wanted to pass my final exam, otherwise my parents are kicking me out.
And I bet you are working towards that?
Yes, I am.
Nice work.
Don't bother me; I've got to concentrate.
Just read the note.
Quiet, I've got to pay attention to my lecture notes.
Who cares about that?
The lecturer was telling us what's on the final exam and some of us want to pass it. I'm going through the notes I made now.
Well, smart guy, you stop your whispering and pay attention then.
I really was sick of eating the same old foods so I finally got some sushi.
How did you like it?
I loved it! It was way better than I thought it would be.
Isn't that raw fish though?
Some is raw fish but you can also get sushi that is cooked, and that's what I got.
What kind of meat was in the sushi then?
I met this famous person that wanted their biography written.
Who was it? And who are they going to get to write it?
It was Tracy and I wrote about her life story.
I can't wait to read it.
Do you know Tracy?
The famous actress?
That's the one. I wrote her biography.
Why didn't you tell me this before?
I had to keep it secret until it was ready to be published.
Well, this is exciting!
This is what I've been working towards my whole career. If it blows up my name will be written in the stars.
And what exactly is that?
I'm writing a biography of Tracy, the famous singer.
That is so cool, I've seen her live and she must have been one of the best performances I've ever seen.
Yeah we're going to have one to one meetings every other day. Gonna be learning a lot about her childhood troubles and rise to fame
Can I come with you?
The library was closed, I managed to break in though.
Why on earth would you do that?
I'm gave myself access so I can get this book I need for my exam tomorrow.
You're absolutely nuts, they have cameras all over the place.
It's ok I'm like a ninja.
Well good luck to you, mate.
I really needed to get a book in the library to help with my assignment and tomorrow is deadline for submission
So that's why you broke in? Seems kind of extreme to me.
I would rather that than fail.
Living life on the edge, I like it.
The only way to live.
Don't you think that is illegal though? You could be jailed for that!
The door was still open, so I let myself in to the library.
It was closed, what did you think you would have access to?
I thought that I could use their internet, but everything was shut down.
You better not do that again or you will get in serious trouble. It is a good thing that you didn't have access to anything.
I guess you are right. That was a stupid move on my part.
Yes it was. Never do that again.
There was a huge bump in his leg
Did you advice him to go to the doctor?
I did and he finally listened and had it checked out
It's better to be safe than sorry
It felt like some kind of lump in his leg.
It has been bothering him for the last week, I thought it was just a bruise.
Well I told him he needs to go and have a doctor check it out.
I was thinking the same, good thing you told him Cameron.
Someone has to do it.
You should've seen it, there was a bump the size of mount Everest on Robin's leg!
Those things are pretty dangerous if they don't diagnose them quickly.
To be honest, I thought it was just from skateboarding after feeling it, however, the best course of action should be to get a professional to look at it.
So you told Robin to go get it checked it out?
Yeah, pretty much.
I hope he listened to you.
I drank way too much tonight.
Were you out at the bar?
Yeah, I was with friends.
Sounds like a fun time.
I wanted to impress them so I knocked a lot back.
I'm not sure that's that impressive to others.
I wish you had been there. That will teach me to try and be a show off, especially with alcohol.
Okay Casey, what did you do this time? I'm glad I wasn't there.
I wanted to be cool so I asked for a double shot of whiskey and just downed the whole thing, kind of.
I've never even seen you drink how did you do?
Fine until I spewed it all over me, them and their parents' new carpet.
Great you made an impression but failed to impress.
I drank a lot last night.
What made you do that?
I was out trying to impress some friends who were doing shots and threw back my drink too fast.
You're not used to alcohol though.
I know! I felt tipsy pretty fast but stopped drinking after that.
Oh well at least you didn't get too drunk with them.
Me and Jesse have known each other for six years already.
You guys went to Milton high school together?
Yes, as well as Middle School.
It's awesome when you find friends like that.
Not many like them, so you have to keep them close by.
That's what I have learned throughout my years.
That was my best friend from school.
How did you two become friends?
We've been in school together for years and we just clicked. Kind of like the inseparable girls.
That's nice! I wish I had a solid friendship like that.
I got another luxury car. You should check it out sometime.
Really? Are you adding to your collection again?
Yeah, I feel like I just can't help it. I love to collect and show off my cars.
If you really want me to see it that bad I'll stop by and take a look.
Yes, you should come by.
You've got to stop spending so much money on cars.
Now my socks are all muddy too because my shoes were too low cut to wear in the mud.
Why didn't you put boots on?
I couldn't find my boots and I wanted to go outside, so I just wore my normal shoes.
There's mud caked all over your ankles.
I know, it's gross. It got into the tops of my shoes too.
Lesson learned.
There's so much mud and clay all over the carpet in my living room.  And my shoes are ruined.
What?  What happened?  Did the dog do it?
No.  I'm an idiot...Yesterday after it rained the yard was all muddy and I wore shoes outside instead of boots, now my shoes are ready for the trash.
You should have known better!  Those shoes were nice, too.
Yep.  And I tracked mud all in the carpet and my wife is so mad.
She should be.  She loves to keep her carpet clean.
Ah, I forgot my boots! I wore my shoes instead and now they might as well be scrapped.
You were always going to get your feet dirty like that.
I know, oh well I'll will be fine.
Yeah, just make sure to hose and wipe them off before coming inside.
Yes, of course.  I don't want my parents getting mad.
No you do not.
I took my friend with me to the party today.
That was nice. Why did you bring her?
She was really down and the party was at a good spot, so I thought it would cheer her up.
Did it work?
Yes and she made a few friends there too.
That's a really nice thing to do for her.
Did you see Cindy at the party?
Yes! she was so happy.
I noticed she was sad, so I invited her along to the party to cheer her up.
She was really cheered up!
I have always been the guardian of Cameron's money.
Did his parent's appoint you as his trustee?
Yes. That happened way back when he was just a kid.
That is a big responsibility.
Certainly. I will carry it out faithfully.
Does he have a lot of money?
The kids came over for the weekend.  I told my friend I would babysit them.
Were they fun to play with?
I love those two,  they are twins.  I was going to eat my apple and they both looked at it like they wanted it, so I sliced it in half and gave it to them.
That's so nice of you.
They are so cute and easy to babysit.  They were well behaved and took their naps together.
I am glad you had a great time with them.
My kids are really liking fruit, I'm so happy about that.
You're lucky. I have to make my kids eat fruit, it's exhausting.
I ran out of fruit today so I had to cut an apple in two. That way they could each have a piece.
I have to threaten mine with no phone or other treats.
I used to have to but, for some reason, now they like it.
I can't believe how low I am on supplies
What sort of supplies?
Food and drink mostly, my pantry is completely empty and so is my fridge
Why don't you go to the store then?
I am going to go but first I need to make a list of everything I need.
OK, I can come with you if you want some company.
What do we need as far as inventory in the store?
We need soda and snack foods. That's what people are always asking for.
Maybe we need hot food like hot dogs and sausages.
That would mean more work and more payroll costs. We would need another employee.
You're right. Let's start with the basics.
I'll send an order for soda and snacks.
I better go to the store.
What do you need?
Lots of things, but I'm not sure what's everything on the list.
Well, you need to look around and make a list.
That's a good idea.
What helps me is to keep a running list that I add to as things run out.
I'm hoping that the jury was able to see what I saw in this case.
From everything that you've told me you presented amazing case for them to look at.
I did my best and now it's in their hands.
Doing your best that's all you can ask for.
It is, but someone's life is at stake here.
I know and that's the tough part of your job.
I was prepared, I've been preparing for several months for this case. It was finally time for me to present Tracy's case before a jury.
Is Tracy the woman who killed her husband in a fight?
She's the abused woman who has suffered for too long.
How did you think your presentation went?
I presented the case the best I could.  It's ongoing, we'll be back in court early next week.
I hope Tracy gets the justice that she deserves.
I'm almost ready to present before jury.
Okay, lets hope everything works on your side.
Yes, are you ready to hear my verdict?
Yes, I'm ready for everything that can possibly go against you and Tracy.
Okay, I'm finished. Let me present it to you before trial.
Cool, lets see it.
I'm so glad that the bakery is doing well now! These custom cupcakes are a real success.
All that hard work you put in is finally paying off.
It's incredible to think where we started from.
Sometimes looking back gives us the extra motivation to push forward.
I think that's exactly what happened to me and having great friends like you guys supporting me.
We know a real one when we see one. You are a real one, Sydney.
I saw a dog today on the streets that was barking at me.
Was it an aggressive dog?
Kind of. But I went up to it and put my hand out to comfort it.
Weren't you afraid it would bite you?
Not really. I've never been afraid of dogs and knew this one was just wary of strangers.
I don't even like seeing small animals in the streets like squirrels.
I am an animal lover by nature, so dogs are pretty nice to me.
Yes, they can sense if a person is afraid of them.
He was barking pretty loud, but I sensed that it was from excitement.
I was actually surprised when you went straight to pat his head.
Then, why didn't you try to stop me?
I wasn't worried because he is a friendly dog. He has not bitten anyone.
I believe all dogs are like furry humans.
Some dogs are mean though.
Nope, all dogs have a nice side.
Haven't you ever been bitten by a dog?
Its never happened to me!
I got bit when I was five and ever since I've been traumatised.
I want to find metal things on the beach.
How are you going to do that?
I bought a metal detector.
Was it expensive?
Do you want to find some metal items on the beach here?
Sure, that sounds like fun. The only issue is that I do not have a metal detector.
It's okay, I can buy one right now.
Okay cool.
Wow, that was a cheap price wasn't it?
Totally! I can't believe you got the detector for only $20.
I'm tired of working this 9-5 job, I need to strike it rich somehow
Me too, well I heard that Bob just recently got rich from finding treasure at the beach
How did he do that?
He bought himself a metal detector, and guess what? I bought one too!
Hmm, sounds like a good idea!
Let's go now before it's too late!
Look what I bought!
Is that a metal detector?
It sure is. I'm going to search for treasure and metal on the beach.
Do you think you will find anything good?
I hope so!
Well, I better come with you then!
You guys try the new internet yet?
Yeah. I hooked mine up last night.
Oh really. Thought you'd try it out before me?
I sure did. And it was super fast and cool.
Well maybe my family needs help setting up the Wi-Fi. I'll give them the password since you guys already have it.
And remember Riley, don't hog up all the internet watching YouTube.
I thought I was going to meet up with them later on.
What happened?
I didn't have enough gas to do it.
You could've used my car.
I didn't want to bother you.
Next time, just ask since it's no bother to me.
I'm sorry, but I won't be able to meet with them as planned.
Why? They were really counting on you turning up.
I just realized that there is not enough gas in my car to get there.
Could you meet them somewhere closer to where you live?
Would they mind meeting with me in my home do you think?
That could be a possibility, give them a call.
It's been so long, I honestly have no idea how people would react if they found out I was still alive.
You need to leave this bunker Alex, you're all over the news and me being here is a risk.
Out there in the trees, God it's been so long since I've seen sunlight.
There is nobody out there, lets go back to the campfire.
No I can't, I don't want to give myself away so easily. After all this time...
Look, there is only so much I can support you man.
So, that's how I wound up here. I've Been here for 20 years, nobody was ever the wiser.
So, 20 years ago, you wandered away from your family and never returned to them? They must be missing you.
They probably did. But I'm sure as the years went on, that feeling went away and I was replaced with someone new.
Alex, you should try to reconnect with them. You don't know what happened. They might still care.
What if they don't, though? What if they moved on like I said. Why reopen old wounds?
Well, it's your life. But still, the curiosity would eat me alive.
Before I moved here, I lived in Los Angeles.
Why'd you leave?
I just got bored and just left one day, and never returned.
Seriously?
Yep, I haven't talked to anyone there since. I wonder if they know why I left.
They're probably worried about you!
How many more batters before my turn?
2 more, and only 1 out so I think you'll be up this inning.
I'm so anxious. My last at bat didn't go so well.
That's right, it was a strike out, wasn't it?
Yeah. I'm hoping to hit a home run this time.
You do it in practice all the time, you can do it!
I know I am going to hit a home run today .
Yeah, you think so? I want to see that.
I can feel it in my bones. I am going to knock it out of the park and win this game as soon as I get to bat.
I hope so, because it has been pretty bad so far. Everyone is striking out.
I was so nervous while I was waiting to bat.
Did you hit a home run?
I really wanted to, but I ended up striking out.
Oh dang, sorry.
No worries! It was still a lot of fun!
Did you have stories read to you when you were a kid?
Yeah, my mom would read me one every night before bed.
Me too! My mom and dad read to me all the time. That's why I have always loved stories. Either reading them myself or being read to!
You still get read to? You're sixteen!
Yeah, so? I'm not an adult, it's nostalgic and it relaxes me.
I know, I'm just messing with you. There's nothing wrong with that.
I have so many books I plan to read. I love stories so much.
Did you order them?
I went to the bookstore. I've always loved stories since I was little when my parents read to me.
You do read a lot. I bet you probably have a good collection.
I think I should start a library of my own.
I'll borrow some from you if you do!
I have always loved stories.
How did you get so into them?
My mom and dad used to read me stories when I was a young girl.
That must a be nice memory.
It is. Hopefully one day I can read stories to my own kid.
I'm sure your parents would love to help you out with that.
I would really love to win the grand prize trip to Hawaii!
Did you buy a ticket yet?
I just put my name in the hat and I might even buy another ticket.
Let's both get one more and if one of us wins we can take the other one.
That is a fantastic idea, we can double our chances!
We better hurry up before they sell out.
I hope I win this hat because I never win any prizes
Tracy, it's your lucky day and you will win
I just hope a get a small chance of winning it
Well, you better put your name in the hat so they can pull it
I already have, more than one entry.
I want this prize so bad!
Put your name in the hat and lets see if we win
I have never won anything before, I am so excited! I've just put my name in now.
We have a good chance because there are not that many entries so far!
What do think we will win?
Hopefully a new iPhone or a computer, that would be really nice!
Are you going to put your name in the hat for a chance to win the prize?
Thinking about it. You?
I already have. I want a chance to win the prize.
What is the prize?
The prize is $1,000.
Wow, that's a lot of money Tracy.
Road trip! So excited. Had to gas up this morning.
Cool! Did you check your fluids and tire pressure too? As someone who has been on road trips, it never hurts to do that either. You should probably get it checked out at the shop too.
Thanks, I will try to find some time to do that before Friday.
Excellent! Have fun. Take some pictures of wherever you go!
There's so much planning that needs to be done for a road trip.
I know, it can be stressful. Sounds obvious, but did you fill up the car?
Yeah, I did that first thing this morning.
Nice one Jesse, you guys are going to have a great time seeing the whole of Texas!
Thank you. I'll keep you updated when we're out there.
I'll be waiting here.
This is the fifth time this has happened to me.
I told you to be kinder to others.
I know, I know you reap what you sow and all that.
Well you never learn and make the same mistake over and over again.
It's just hard to change my ways but this time I will learn the lesson.
You say that right now, but I bet you will trip with the same stone again.
I should have stayed away from the preacher's girl.
The church is going to cast you out! Did you learn nothing with the Posey women?
It is different with Amy. We are in love.
You have ruined her for any other man!
I made dinner for my friends this weekend.
How did it go? Did they like the food?
They did, but I made so much and was running behind so I used a jar of sauce instead of something homemade for the spaghetti.
Some of those jars are just fine to eat. Did everyone like it?
Everyone had some and seemed to be happy with it.
Then I'd say it was a success, even if it was only partly homemade.
I'm really losing my touch in the kitchen.
But you love cooking Alex?
I know but with the stress of being a student I never have time. The other day instead of making my own sauce I used one of those premade ones you buy from the shops
Did your friends like it at least?
I could tell that they weren't really digging it.
Ungrateful if you ask me.
I normally don't like corporal punishment, but the rebels had to be executed.
What did they do to deserve such a thing?
They burned down the whole village. Not only that, but they murdered the survivors.
That's an unforgivable crime.
Remy and Blake made fun of me yesterday. I felt awful.
That is so childish of them.
Remy felt bad also, I guess, so they both came back and said they were sorry.
She finally realised what she did was wrong.
Yeah, I hope so!
Remy and Blake were teasing me and making fun of my yesterday, they can be such jerks.
I know, sometimes they strut around thinking that they own the place.
At least they apologised this time, I wonder if they actually felt bad about it.
I wouldn't put my money on it, could have just been a teacher telling them off.
It was embarrassing nonetheless, and very awkward.
Just hit me up if they say something mean again.
I ordered happy meals for Kian and Ethan.
Oh I wish you hadn't had done that.
Why? I thought they would enjoy the toys.
Exactly, now they will not eat. They'll just play.
I didn't really think of that. My apologies.
It's okay.
I'm feeling pretty frustrated with my kids right now.
But your kids are such sweethearts.
I know, but I took them to get dinner at McDonald's, and they all refused to eat!
McDonald's has such addictive food, so why didn't they eat?
They were too distracted from pulling the toys.
I used to love the toys in the Happy Meals. Can't blame them!
So I took the kids to McDonald's.
The must have had a good time. Kids love a good burger and fries.
Well you got one out of two. All they did was play with the toys.
Well it's for the better, McDonald's food will just make them unhealthy.
That was a waste of money on food.
You're right, the kids totally ignored the food.
They just wanted to go to McDonald's because of the mystery box.
Kids, I guess we were the same when we were little.
Yeah, I remember those toys were the main reason to eat there.
I guess some things don't change.
I just wanted to give Jordan something to show him how much I care about this.
is it for his birthday that you forgot about last week?
Yeah, I'm not going to lie, I screwed up. But at least now we're back on track.
What did you do to recover?
I wrapped my arms around him and then pulled out a great gift.
Oh nice, what did you get him?
So I will leave all my responsibilities to four key employees now that I am retiring.
But Cameron, you have only been with the company for two years. Why retire?
I am done so much and met my goals in life at the young age of 32. I feel I have contributed so much and would like to give the team a chance. I gave every speech again and it is exhausting.
I have been working hard, so that hopefully I can become part of this corporation too one day.
I know and I am so proud of you. Keep it up!
I will need you to teach me the tricks and skills of the job, so that I can run effective corporate meetings like you.
Damn what a stressful day, a lot of the directors were out dealing with international matters and I had to give every speech for the company.
I hope you are ready to read through all the feedback.
How do you think the speeches went?
I felt like you delivered on your vision.
I think after that we will see a new wave of funding.
Well done Cameron, I knew I could count on you.
I feel like I crushed every talking point.
Were you nervous at all?
No, I practiced a lot.
I hope you got a standing ovation.
Most people there fell asleep. Wasn't easy giving ten speeches in one day.
Well as long as your boss didn't fall asleep you are good!
This meeting today was a once in a lifetime opportunity.
I heard that you had to give tons of speeches.
Yes, most of them said that it would have been better to have a bigger range of speakers, so to avoid a biased analysis.
Have you heard anything about the demand for black pens?
Black pen demand should remain stable for the foreseeable future.
Thanks for doing the presentation. I knew I could count on you to deliver.
I just finished another busy corporate meeting.
I noticed you've been giving a lot of speeches lately.
I have, in fact I'm giving every speech for the company.
That is impressive, they must really value your work.
I think they do, it's an important responsibility.
It certainly is an important job.
I can't believe Quinn caught both me and the cat today.
What happened?
Well, we were playing a game and she fooled us both by using mirrors.
Well that sounds like an interesting trick.
It really was especially when the cat got caught as well.
I bet you laughed about that one.
I got absolutely made a fool of today!
Oh god, was Quinn back at it with his sneaky tricks?
Yeah, he was playing cat noises really loudly so me and the cat went over to check if the cat was ok. But it wasn't a cat, it was Quinn jumping out and frightening us.
That's funny. Was the cat confused?
Oh, yeah. The cat was totally shocked.
That's funny.
Quinn thinks she's so smart. Little dickens was trying to fool me.
What was she doing?
She was playing a game. Even the cat was watching her intently. Then she screamed and scared both of us.
So she wasn't playing the game?
No, she was just getting us interested so she could scare us. It was funny.
I was in the groove, top of my game and this happens.
You should understand the situation, Kai.
I do but this was the best performance ever. I don't think I have ever been this good.
Dude, this lady had a massive heart attack. They had no choice.
I gotcha. I will send her free tickets to my next concert.
Kai, are you aware that all of your concerts have been cancelled due to low sales?
A terrible thing happened today.
What happened today?
I was performing in a concert when a member of the audience collapsed.
That is a terrible thing.
I had to stop playing and call for a doctor.
You did the right thing.
I cant believe someone in the audience just collapsed.
Yeah I saw that at the concert too.
It caught me off guard I had to stop playing.
Yeah I noticed.
I hope she is ok.
Me too. She's in intensive care now apparently.
I was dancing and performing the concert and I had to stop.
Why did you have to stop performing?
A member of the audience passed out.
That is too bad, is there anything I can do to help you?
Not really, but I really appreciate your concern. Thanks.
You are welcome, let me know if you need me in the future.
I can't believe I bought Tracy candy.
You are always treating her to things. I think you spoil her too much.
Tracy was bouncing off the walls when we got home. All I wanted was a nap.
Don't buy her sweets anymore.
I learned my lesson, she just kept begging me.
Stand your ground and teach her boundaries.
I wanted to treat Tracy.
What did you do?
I gave her some candy.
I hope she liked it.
Damn man this sucks.
What happened?
I got cancer man.
Seriously?
Unfortunately, yeah bro. Won't be long until I'm on the other side.
I'm sorry man, I'll be here for you until then.
I went and helped Jan move into her new place last night.
I thought she had already got everything moved into the new apartment?
Chris ended up bailing on her at the last minute and she could not move the furniture by herself.
It is great to be able to have a friend that you can call when you need help.
She would have done the same thing for me.
If she needs help moving anything else, call me and I will help as well.
Jan had just moved in but had to go to work, so I went and moved her furniture for her.
That was really nice of you.
She helped me move last year, so it was the least I could do.
Was there a lot to do?
Not as much as I thought. It was mainly unpacking the boxes and setting up the big stuff.
I bet she was thrilled when she got home and the work was all done!
I'm so glad Jan is finally all moved in and over the stress.
That was nice of you to help her out with the furniture.
Yeah, she just needed a bit of extra muscle for those huge bookcases of hers.
She's a college professor right?
Yeah, I honestly couldn't believe the amount of books I saw.
She must be so smart.
Phew! That was a lot of work.
Thank you so much for helping Jan out, I don't think she could have done it without you.
Don't mention it, I know how much of a hassle moving is.
It really is. I wasn't looking forward to it, but now that it's over it didn't seem like such a big deal. Me and Jan will get you a present for your help.
You're her mum right? You guys look so similar
Yeah, she says it's not true!
I was working at the bake shop today and had to instruct the new baker on the times
The cooking times?
Yes, they need to be appropriate
Yeah, you really don't want under baked goods at all
Or burnt for that matter.
Yeah, that would suck
I've really been loving my new job!
That's awesome! Where do you work again?
I've been working at a bakeshop. I actually have a lot more responsibility than I thought
I'm glad you're happy!
Yeah, it's definitely my favourite job I've ever had. Today I was coaching a starter on how to determine when cakes are ready to perfection.
I'll definitely make sure to stop by one day!
I can't believe this happened in the most inconvenient time.
What?
As soon as I was almost with my shopping, I had to go all the way home to use the bathroom.
Why not just stop at a local restaurant?
I only stopped home briefly this afternoon, but I had to run back out.
If you had to run back out, why did you come home in the first place?
I had to use the bathroom! Have you seen the public restrooms lately? Yuck!
I have, but I wouldn't think they were so disgusting that I would run back home to use the bathroom!
Well that is the difference between you and I then.
You are so dramatic.
I read an excerpt out loud so that everyone could hear it.
What excerpt?
It's a summary of a book.  I am giving the class a choice on the next book we will be reading.
That's cool.  What did the class decide on?
They wanted to read Harry Potter.
Great choice, I read that whole series.
These class activities I've been experimenting with seem to be very effective.
Did you read another excerpt out loud?
Yeah, today I chose Romeo and Juliet.
Oh yes! Who could forget about Shakespeare's masterpiece.
Surprisingly, a lot of the class had no idea what it is.
I wanted to share information with the class.
Wow, how nice of you.
I read an excerpt out loud.
I hope your students took notes.
I hope so too, because I'm not repeating myself.
You're so strict Addison.
I read the excerpt out loud, it was important for everyone in our circle to know
I heard that it was very informative.
I think my opinions matter but it's more about how I convey them.
Yes I agree, you need to speak up more just like that.
I hope the group appreciates it
I'm sure they do, well done.
I ended up staying up late to tie up loose ends on the project.
Was there a lot left for you to do?
Unfortunately, yes. The others in the team were falling behind.
Good call on your part. I'd hate to see you lose points for their work.
I ended up writing the paper, and doing the visual work too.
Wow, I bet you are worn out from all that work.
I think we need to hurry up and get this thing going
I just feel sorry for all the homeless people because of the bad weather
That's why I want to move quickly, that way they won't have to sleep outside anymore. I had to pull this project together.
I think you can get it up and running in as little as two weeks if possible
I found this stray cat prowling around behind the barn, I really wanted to adopt it.
Isn't your partner really allergic to cats?
Yeah that's why we took it to a shelter in the end.
I'm sure they will take good care of her.
Hopefully, that cat was honestly so sweet.
I'm sure they will.
Look at the cute cat I found! She was just wandering around on the road with a hurt paw.
What did you do with the cat?
I took it to a shelter where they will look after it, Bill is too allergic to even think about keeping one in our house.
I hear that you can get used to them, but I suppose it's not worth the risk.
Last time he was around one we had to take him to hospital.
Ok, he's definitely better off in the shelter then!
I couldn't even look at his face in the casket.
Funerals are tough.
I had to put flowers over Kendall's face.
I totally understand.
That was my best friend.
I'm here if you need anything.
I covered Kendall's face as a sign of respect, I sure hope he rests in peace.
You did the right thing.
Right. His death was so unfair, he will be dearly missed.
He lived an awesome life, at least.
It's just so sad to see someone die at such a young age
We all knew too was going to die because of his bad drug addiction
We tried to help him so many times and he just wouldn't listen to anyone at all
It is so sad and i wish we could have done more to help him and I feel bad
Let's try not to think about it
I just had a security system installed and I put bars on all my lower windows.
Wow, I bet that was expensive.
It was, but I had to do it, the neighbourhood has had a rash of break ins.
That's too bad. It used to be better right?
A long time ago maybe, its been bad for a while now.
Well, they most likely won't be able to break through bars, so you should feel safe.
Did john's place really get robbed last week?
Yeah, I think he said he's closing now.
It's a good thing I've put up some security
Yeah, I did the same thing as you.
The paranoia is real.
Trust me.
I will be able to sleep better now knowing the house is completely secure with a system and bars to keep the burglars away.
There is nothing better than risk free sleep.
Absolutely. Especially with my wife and kids at home
You have to do everything to protect your family
Exactly. How about you family? I Hope they are all good?
Yes they are. Thanks for asking.
This neighbourhood is so bad.
Yeah, I just installed a home security system.
Same and I placed bars on my lower windows.
Smart idea.
Yup, they reduce the risk of burglary.
It looks a little ugly but it's true.
Well that was a waste of money.
What was?
I bought a Kindle from Amazon that I never use.
Why not? You love to read.
I know, but I just love the way a real book feels in my hands more than the Kindle.
True and it's not good to always look at a screen.
Look at my niece! She has so many friends at school already.
She looks like she's one of the popular kids.
Yeah, everyone's crowding around her because she's so pretty and she wears such interesting clothing.
I hope it's not overwhelming for her. Popularity is hard to deal with sometimes.
My niece is adjusting well to the new school.
She is amazing, she will make friends easily.
She came home from school and said her classmate liked her exotic attire that she wears.
See? you were worried about her being different, but her inner and outer looks are what her classmates like about her.
Are you ready to study ? Or do you want drink a bit first?
Oh we need to stay sober. This test is important. But the free drinks are calling me.
Me too. How about one round and then we get a coffee later?
Cool. That sounds like a good idea.
It's not the best setting to study but the library was full to the brim.
Wait so you guys studied at a bar?
Yeah. Shame that halfway through we got distracted and started drinking. Me and my friends went off to study for the finals.
I suppose you needed something to take the edge off the finals.
Yeah, but not the greatest idea! We were all hungover as hell.
You guys need to chill.
Holy cow, how is it eleven o'clock already?
Did you just get in? You're two hours late.
Traffic was awful and I even left early today cause I wanted to get a coffee before work.
Was there an accident?
Not mine, but a car broke down on the bridge and then a truck hit it.  Biggest traffic jam ever.
That's brutal.  Well, you're here, go get some coffee and take a minute to settle in.
I think my boss is going to be mad at me for being late to work again this week
This is your third time being late to work, just this week
I hope I don't get fired because he only gave me a warning last time. It's not my fault if the traffic is awful though.
I think it will just be a write up. I wouldn't worry about it.
Hopefully everything will be okay
I am so sick of sitting in traffic this morning!
I know, this is insane. I never knew how busy rush hour was here.
I think I finally made it through the biggest traffic jam.
Oh well, you're already late to work.
I'll have to find a new route tomorrow, right?
Yes, or you just need to leave earlier.
I decided to treat my friends to some pizza at this new joint in town.
What might that be?
It's called pizza palace, they have over 100 different pizza toppings.
Damn, considering I only like margherita there's no point taking me there.
No, trust me, I will take you there too next time, and you won't be disappointed.
You're a great friend.
I haven't been out in a couple of weeks.  I had a crazy craving for pizza so I decided to take my friends out to eat at a restaurant.
Where did you guys go?
We ended up at that new Italian restaurant next to the art galleria.
How was it?
The food was amazing.  The crowd was hip and young.
That sounds like a hotspot.
I gave that little kid a soccer ball because he looked so bored
Lets go over there and kick the ball with him
Sounds like a great idea. I think he would like that
Do you have another ball if we need it? Since we may lose this one.
I'm really glad I had more than one soccer ball.
Where's the other one?
I gave it to the kid down the street. They needed something to play with.
That was super nice of you.
It's no big deal. I still have the other one so we can still practice for try outs this year
Oh, that's great. We should get started right away, they're only a few weeks from now.
This kid wouldn't stop bothering us today, so I gave him a soccer ball to go play with.
That should've shut him up.
Yeah man, he was really persistent I couldn't believe it.
They are sometimes these kids, did he give it back?
No he ended up losing it but it's no big deal. I have loads more.
I hope he apologised at least!
I gave a soccer ball to my neighbour's child.
That's nice. Why'd you do it?
I just noticed that they really liked the sport.
You should've given them some lessons as well.
Want to learn a trick to stop kids pestering you? Give them a soccer ball and you will be at peace.
Yeah, I do that with my son sometimes.
I just didn't want this kid to bother us during practice, so I gave him one of mine.
Smart move.
I can see you are a good swimmer.
I am a novice, but you are an expert in swimming.
It was not easy in the beginning. I spent hours and hours learning swimming. Then, I trained very hard to perfect different strokes
All that hard work has paid off. You are now an expert.
I am also happy that I didn't give up but kept trying to reach this stage.
I am happy for you.
I am now a swimming expert
Good! you learnt so fast!
Yea! I worked really hard to learn all the different strokes
Will you teach me?
If you are really ready to learn, I will teach you
Ok, thanks!
I can't wait to get to the beach to show you all the strokes I've managed to learn.
I didn't know you knew how to swim so well.
I learned to swim in a gym class and then decided to learn every stroke type I could and become an expert.
Did it work? Are you expert at all of them now?
I am close to it and can teach you too if you want.
I'm in! Let's get on the beach.
I got in trouble last night.
What happened?
I was in such a hurry to get to the hospital and I did not notice the light was red.
I am glad you did not get into an accident.
That is true. But the police have warned that they may take away my license.
Be careful next time.
I'm so nervous, but I think I'm ready. This is what I've worked towards my whole life.
You've got to go out there, Lee didn't give you this opportunity for nothing.
I get stage fright, I just hope I can overcome it once I'm out there.
Get out there and show them what you're made of!
I'm going to make Lee proud.
You're going to do great, just believe in yourself.
I got an opportunity to perform, finally.
Where was this?
This was for Lee's talent show. I was so ready to get on stage.
How did you perform?
I think it was slightly worse than my best during practice.
That's still pretty good.
I am so excited. I can't wait to hit the stage.
That is the spirit. Where will you be performing?
Lee gave me an opportunity to sing at the talent show.
Congratulations! I will be cheering you from the crowd.
Thank you for your support!
I will always be your number one fan.
Finally got the game I was programming past the beta testers and ready for release.
Is that the game you've been working on for the last year?
Yeah, six days a week at least ten hours a day.
That's a rough schedule to keep up with for that long.
It was, but the effort was worth it, people love it and I am so happy.
Then it was definitely worth the time and effort, I can't wait to get a chance to play it.
I'm programming a new game to create multiple players in a monopoly game.
How much progress have you made?
I'm almost finished. I've been working nonstop for the past week.
Did you take breaks?
I took a few breaks, and now I'm done. I'm so happy, this was a lot of work.
I want to see how the game plays.
This game has taken months to program.  It took so much effort but I am finally done, I am happy with it.
Is it a fun game?
I think so.  It's a demo at the moment, I am trying to get funding for it so I can start my gaming company.
You are so ambitious.
My friends and I are already assembling a team of people to work on the final product.
I can be a tester if you need anyone for that.
I just finished programming the new game.
I can see you tried with the game.
The new game has taken a lot of my effort and energy.
So how do you feel about the game now?
I am so happy with the result of the game!
I will have to check it out.
After my workout the other day I was starving hungry!
I am always really hungry after a workout too.
I had a huge burger and couldn't wait to get a big bite!
A burger sure does sound good right now.
I know, it was so good I forgot how much I love burgers.
Now I want to eat one for dinner.
I am so hungry and this burger is so good.
You know, a burger probably isn't the best thing to eat after a workout?
I don't care I have been eating good all week and it is Friday. I've earnt it.
Touché, maybe I will have one too.
I think I will get another one honestly.
You are going to put back on any weight you just lost you know.
This was the best post workout meal
Did it not defeat the purpose?
It was a turkey burger.
With all the fixings!
Now you're making me feel bad.
I'm just joking with you.
Man, I am starving!
So am I, what are you going to be eating?
With the amount I worked there in the spin class, I think I can afford a burger! What a great workout that was!
Wow, I see you already took a big bite, and yes it was a great workout.
Damn right it was a big bite!
So when are we hitting up the gym again Aubrey?
I sacrificed my weekend to help my mate move in.
Wasn't it a lot of hassle?
Yeah but it's the least I could do for him, he helped me settle in when I first moved to the city.
Yeah man, this place can be like a jungle if you're not used to it.
Plus he said I'm welcome over at any point, and his new place is so damn nice.
Don't take advantage of it though.
I am so tired, my whole body is aching me
Why? And where are you coming from?
I am coming from my friend's house. He is moving into a new place, so I had to go help him.
He moved this weekend ?
Yes, he did.
Oh, that is fine. You did a great job.
Oh my God, I am in big trouble.
What have you done now, Lee?
I was helping my friend move in over the weekend and I dropped this really expensive vase
Ouch. How did he react?
It was covered by insurance but he is still very cross at me since it was antique and extremely rare.
Well, at least you helped him move in!
My back is killing me.
You seriously wasted your whole weekend helping your friend move in?
It's cool. I didn't have anything else going on last weekend so I didn't mind.
Should've asked me, I went to this big party and could've got you in.
I appreciate that but I really wanted to help him out, he's strapped for cash and couldn't pay anyone to do it.
You're a top friend.
I thought I was going to pass out at the meeting yesterday!
What happened, were you sick?
I had to give a presentation and I was no nervous, my knees were knocking, I was sweating, I could not wait until it was over!
Oh I can only imagine how uncomfortable that must have been
It was! I just wanted to get out of there! The last page of that paper was the best thing I had seen all day.
And look, you survived! Good job
You know how much I hate public speaking.
I remember you shaking when we did our first speech in high school.
When I had to speak at the conference last week I actually couldn't wait for it to be over. I looked up halfway through the presentation and got PTSD.
You have really come a long way though!
I think I am going to try mindfulness training to help me get through these longer presentations.
I know somebody who leads the training if you need a contact to get started.
I just got finished with that speech I had today.
Oh yes, was that the meeting with the new clients?
Yes, I was extremely nervous. You know how I hate speaking in front of others.
How did it go? Did you embarrass yourself?
I think it went ok, but while I was speaking I just couldn't wait for it to be over.
I'm sure you did great and it is good that you keep on confronting your fear of public speaking.
We had a town hall meeting earlier in the week and I had to talk about important topics.
Oh my goodness, I bet that talking in front of everyone was nerve wrecking!
Well luckily I had good notes to keep me on track and remember everything I needed to talk about.
What a great idea! I'm sure the notes kept your focus.
Yes, I tried to make a checklist as I finished each topic.....I just wanted to get out of there as soon as I could!
Well, it sounds like everything went pretty good...I'm very proud of you!
I hate talking in front of a group.
Tell me about it, it's the absolute worst.
I hope it's a long time before I have to do this again.
From what I heard, it's going to be a monthly thing.
I can't do this again next month.
You won't, they rotate the speakers.
I bought some milk today.
What else you got?
I also rearranged all the ingredients.
Oh right, why would you do that?
So that I'm ready to make a big dinner, I have plenty of guests coming over.
Hey, what about me?
I am so tired of this task, I can't take it anymore.
Don't give up yet, you can find a way to get it done.
I am sick of it, just knowing I have to look at it makes me tremor.
Have you given up altogether?
I'm done, I am ready to put this project behind me.
You gave up way too soon, man.
I knew that I would burn out doing this, so I just quit before I got real bad.
Are you talking about your university thesis?
Yeah, there are so many discrepancies in the study that there is truly no point to keep it going.
You could always use some of the research and restart?
Yeah, I will use a different approach, but with this one I have given up for sure..
Don't beat yourself up about it, quantum mechanics is a difficult topic.
I took one break and I was done.
Wasn't the weather miserable?
Yeah it didn't help. I just knew I was going to give up before we got to the top of the mountain, so I put myself out my own misery an hour in.
It's not your fault, you got an injury pretty early on.
Yeah it was a bad day, I think I will attempt it again at some point.
Sounds good to me.
I still don't feel well.
I hope you feel better soon so we can get together.
I'm so weak, I don't feel like eating. I hope this ends soon.
You'll be fine. I can come over tonight and cook for you if you want.
After being in the hospital two weeks, eating that awful food, please come over.
I'll be there in 10 minutes.
I am so happy to sleep on my own bed.  I've been in the hospital for two whole weeks.  I thought I was going to die.
Welcome home.  I am coming over to visit you this weekend.
That would be great.  I miss you all.
We missed you too.  Once you get stronger, we'll go out on the town again.
That would be amazing to get back to my normal life.
You will.  It'll just be a bit more time.
It feels so good to be home from the hospital after two weeks.
We're all happy to see you home and okay.
Yeah, being sick at the hospital was horrible. But it wasn't the worst thing.
What was the worst thing?
The hospital food.
You're going to have to wait a little while longer since delivery won't be here for an hour.
I was feeling bad for my mum, she spent so much on that outfit for me.
I'm sure she wanted to treat you, but appreciate her and not just your materialistic possessions.
Who do you take me for? I love my mum.
I'm sure you do but just consider what I said.
I like this outfit, and the Gucci shoes just top it off.
Don’t you think you're a bit spoilt Skylar?
Excuse me? I've done extra chores this week to earn this and I work for my dad too on occasions.
Still, seems like your parents just buy whatever you want, whenever you want.
You're just being a hater now.
Oh, please.
Man, I am losing my patience with all these teenagers.
Did you have troubles in class again?
I asked the class what they would like to do on their break and Jordan cursed at me.
Wow, that is really extreme. I hope you took the proper course of action.
He's going to be suspended from the school until further notice.
Well, justice is served.
Jordan is such a rude youth, someone ought to teach him some manners.
I hear he has a lot of trouble at home.
Being a complete idiot is not going to help though, is it?
What happened between you and him?
I just asked him a simple question and he replied so dismissively and passive aggressive
Try a different approach, if not he may need a counsellor.
I have Friday off and I'm going to spend the whole day playing Xbox.
What are you going to play on the Xbox?
I got two new games. And I've been looking forward to playing them all week.
What kind of games did you get?
RPG games. Those are my favourites.
Maybe I will see you online and join you.
I'm so excited, I haven't had new video games in about two years.
What happen to your old ones?
I gave them to a charity shop, I was so fed up of playing them. Now I've bought some new ones I liked.
That's really nice of you. Not only will you make someone happy with a new game but you will also help the needy.
I just enjoy doing nice gestures like that
This is why you're my friend, Cameron.
If you've got free time later, come on over and play some video games with me. I just bought a bunch of them at the store.
Are they any good?
I don't know yet, but I liked the look of them and have been wanting to play them the whole month.
Aren't you a little too old for video games?
Only for bad video games!
Hey, what's up?
Nothing much, I am bored at home, what about you?
I went to the store and bought some video games that I liked and wanted to play.
Wow, That sounds really fun.
Come over sometime, we will play together.
Sure, I will.
Everything has just been unfolding so fast.
I saw you on TV Lee! You met the King.
One minute I was working in the coffee shop, the next I'm invited to their grand palace.
I'm so proud of you, you've done our country a great service.
I appreciate it. Of course I would defend this country anytime!
May you and your family be blessed for all that you have done for us!
I got my medal with the king yesterday!
Wow how did that go? Did he say anything to you?
It was really exciting and I was so nervous. He only said a few words.
So you didn't have to make small talk or do anything special?
It is all scripted out and they tell you what to do. It was so fun and easy.
I can't believe you met him. That's such an honour to remember a long time.
It was honestly breath-taking, the most amazing experience of my life.
Wow, look at you with your shiny medal! You rock Lee.
This is a result of hard work and humility, something that I will teach my kids one day.
What was the King like? I hear he can be very stern.
Me and him got along really well. We had a dinner service after the ceremony and I managed to exchange a few words.
I am so jealous.
It was the most amazing moment of my life, meeting King Gustav.
I can't believe the authorities agreed to let me tag along. I would have asked you to pinch me. But, it was clear to me that you had done all you could do to keep your mouth from falling open.
Well, you were there when I saved the prince from the fire. You helped resuscitate him after I got him out. I don't see why you shouldn't have been there.
Thanks. You did all the really hard work.
What matters most is that it was a truly one of a kind day! I am so glad someone took pictures, even if I do have an expression on my face like the village idiot.
Your hair looks good anyway. Plus, you'll have an amazing story to tell your grandkids someday.
I got my butt kicked today. I was the king in our video game and someone I don't know, attacked and beat us.
Well, that's usually what happens in video games.
Yes, but now they don't want me to be king, if they win, when they go for revenge.
You have a mighty fickle base.
I guess, I'm screwed now.
I lost, I failed
Hey don't worry you put your best effort in
I did, but the enemy was too strong, people aren't confident in my skills anymore
You'll earn that confidence back you're tough
Thank you, I need to think this over
You're one of the best of the best, you won't lose again
That battle in the video game did a number on my virtual general's reputation.
How badly did you drop the ball?
Hard enough that our entire squad got wiped out. No one wants me to lead now.
What decision do you regret?
I led everyone into an ambush while people were expressing doubts.
Sure glad it's not real life.
I'm really embarrassed that my brother is so much more successful than I am.
That's nothing to be embarrassed about.
Well, I'm much older than him so I should be at least as successful or more successful than him.
Not necessarily.  What you think is success may not be considered successful by everyday standards
I am happy with my job and life, so that's important.
It is, and that makes you successful.
I always thought I would be making more money than my little brother but he's doing really well in his career.
That's great.
I feel embarrassed sometimes.  I feel like I am not doing enough in life compared to him.
You shouldn't compare yourself to your brother.  You guys are both successful.
My parents tell me it's not all about money.  I know that but I still have always thought I would be the more successful brother.
How do you define success?
I don't know how my brother gets so lucky in his career.
What has he been doing?
He just got his second promotion this year, and is getting a bonus for the quarter. I feel like a failure.
You aren't a failure. He's a really ambitious guy, so I'm not surprised he's moving up quickly. You just take a different approach to your career.
Yeah, the 'not going anywhere' approach. I wish I had half his drive. It's embarrassing to have a little brother that's more successful than you.
Don't be embarrassed. We all have our own strengths. You have an creative streak that your brother just can't match.
Skylar has absolutely no respect for anyone, not even herself I'm convinced.
I already know where this story is leading to.
I'm sure you do! Because you've heard me say it five times before.
What did she lose this time?
My power tool, I had only just bought it! That's the last she's borrowing anything of mine.
My God that girl is a liability.
I want to be a doctor.
That isn't easy.
I have to go a university and study hard and get good grades.
That's just to get you into medical school which is harder yet.
I know, but I'm up to it.
I think so too.
I'm so motivated for this medicine scholarship, nothing can distract me.
I bet that's going to take a lot of hard work. I am so happy for you.
Yes. They expect a ridiculously high GPA to get into medical school, so it won't be easy.
I wish you well, you've always had the right personality for a doctor.
Thank you, I'll bear that in mind.
I am sure you will do well.
The wedding day was far more hectic than I expected.
A lot of people say that they were overwhelmed on their wedding day.
I was more than overwhelmed. I was a monster. I yelled at my whole bridal party any family member who passed me, the caterer; absolutely everyone.
Wow, did anyone take your behaviour personally?
No. I apologized to everyone afterwards and everyone said they understood.
It's good they didn't take it personally.
I think the drink really got to me on my wedding day. Then the stress of it all made me lash out at my guests.
Aubrey, Aubrey. You really need to watch it, you're a married woman now!
I know! I felt awful because it was meant to be a day of celebration and it just turned sour.
I hope your guests understood the stress you were under.
Yeah they did, and thankfully they accepted my apology.
That's nice of them.
I love to ride my bike.
Let's take a ride this afternoon?
My bicycle is in the repair shop today. Maybe tomorrow?
What happened?
It's just the chain which needed to be replaced.
See you tomorrow then.
Ugh! I can't believe I had to drag my bike all the way to the repair shop. The chain slipped and it took a wile to get there. It was such a waste of time!
Well but now you have your bike back 100% fixed!
Not really, two days after I took it to be repaired, it got stolen!
Really? How'd that happen?
I guess someone broke the lock when I was at school. I always ride there, and I don't know how I'll be getting to school now.
How unlucky. I hope you didn't pay too much to repair it...
I'm the best student in the class.
How do you know you're the best?
The teacher asks us questions, but I always answer first.
Are you sure the teacher doesn't want everyone to answer?
Then the teacher should pick on each student and not leave it open.
That does make sense.
Those questions are just simple.
You answered all the questions first.
Yeah, the teacher wanted all the students to answer, but we don't need to waste our time.
You're just being a teacher's pet, Bailey.
Don't whine me, when you are not on my level.
Whatever bro.
Riley is such a nice guy.
How do you mean?
After I got my hair done, I was having trouble pulling my wool sweater over my head so Riley did it.
Riley pulled the sweater over your head?
Yes, and he didn't even mess up my hairdo.
That Riley is multi-talented.
I just got a new hairdo. I had to struggle to take my sweater off while avoiding ruining it.
It is easier if you let someone help.
I know. Thankfully Riley was there to pull it over my head.
I can't wait to see how it turned out.
I spent so much on my hair, I didn't want a silly sweater to ruin it for me.
But it's part of your outfit right?
Yeah, that's why Riley came over and did it for me.
He's such a nice guy isn't he.
I hate that I have to share my toy with my brother.
Well everyone has to share with their sibling.
Yeah, but I bought the toy with my own money!
Don't be selfish, Kendall.
It's just not fair. If Tommy wants to play with a toy, he can buy it himself.
But Kendall, Tommy is too little to be making his own money right now.
I am going to get a toy that we can share.
Do you want me to walk with you to the store?
Yeah, What kind of toy do you think my brother would like?
Maybe a car, you both could play with.
I wonder what my brother would think about me getting a doll as one of their toys.
I don't think he would really like a doll to play with
How about this new Pokémon figurine?
I am sure he will like that because he loves Pokémon
Sounds like a deal then.
Look at this toy I got! Me and my brother are going to have so much fun!
That's the most expensive one they had in store! How did you afford that?
My parents gave us an allowance, I decided to buy us this with the money.
Sounds fun! He's going to love it, I'm sure.
You could come over and play with us at some point?
Yeah, as soon as I'm not grounded anymore...
My brother and I saved money to buy toys.
What are you going to buy?
We have enough money to buy one toy that we both want.
Are you going to buy it today?
I'm going to buy the toy today and share it with my brother.
You and your brother will probably enjoy the new toy.
Let me roll up my sleeves before you throw that last dish in there.
Okay, what are you doing?
I am about to do the dishes but I didn't want to get my sleeves wet.
Oh I see, I have some more dishes in my room. Hang on.
Okay, I'll be waiting.
I rolled up my shirt sleeves and got ready to do the dishes.
Did you have a lot of dishes to do?
Just a sink full of them. We just had a party and I was helping with the dishes.
Was this at your house?
It was at my parent's house.  It was my dad's birthday.
How special.
I have been trying to sell my house.
What happened?
I lost my job.
Are there any prospective buyers?
Yes and after weeks of considering my options, I happily accepted the offer on the house.
That is great news.
Hi, how's it going?
Pretty well, how are you? Did you end up selling your house?
Yeah, I did. I thought about it for awhile, and I did accept the one offer that came in.
That's great. Well, it's good you took care of it. Lots of extra money for you, huh?
Well it doesn't exactly work that way, but I guess so.
I'm so glad I joined these clubs and made some new friends
It's good to know people at school so you can have fun and meet new people
Yeah, I don't know why I was so shy at first but now I am having a good time
Well, that's good. Let's go over to the table and get some snacks and a drink.
Sounds like a great idea to me
I know what you mean, I used to be shy at school too, have you tried joining any after school clubs? I met many new friends doing that.
That is a good idea, I will look into it and see what they offer.
Look for things you are interested in. I like sports so I also got involved in basketball, I have a ton of friends now.
I do like soccer and track but I don't know if I like it enough to make friends out of it, Sasha.
The only way to come out of your shyness is to make friends, I am so much happier and outgoing now.
Thanks for the advice, I really appreciate that.
I joined the basketball team.
Wow, that's a really bold move of you, how do you like it so far?
I know! I like it a lot, I am not very good, but I have met a lot of new people.
Do you play against other schools?
No, we just play games with each other.
That's cool, a lot less pressure.
I love my school so much. I have got friends, and basketball, it's just awesome!
That's great. I'm so happy you've opened up.
I know! I was always shy in elementary school but I really feel like I'm finally blooming!
I'm happy for you.
I think I'm going to try out for basketball this semester.
That's great Sasha. You could get a letterman. Let me know how it goes.
I made the team! I joined originally just to make friends but now it's getting serious.
Really? Wow! I'll come to all your games Sasha.
Being on the basketball team is great. I think I'll try to join chess club and the school newspaper too!
That's the spirit.
I was terrified, but I think Ash was in an even worse state.
Did you call the police?
No, he was holding a pistol and was acting very sketchy. I ended up talking him through the problems and calming him down.
I know he hasn't been in the best of moods recently.
I just couldn't believe he had got hold of a pistol, but I don't think he wanted to harm anyone with it.
The guy needs to see a doctor.
Ash was holding a weapon and looking frightened.
That's scary. What could be happening?
I do not know, but I asked him to explain what was going on.
What was his explanation?
He failed to answer me!
There is this really cute girl in my algebra class this year.
I bet you won't do anything about it.
Today she smiled at me when I looked over at her so I smiled back.
Now you just have to find out who she is.
I asked Brandon and he said her name is Ann, they had biology together last year.
Perfect, you have biology this year so you can ask her for some help.
You know how I'm divorcing my wife right?
Yeah.
Well the kids haven't been taking it well, they've been struggling in school.
What are you going to do about that?
I met their teacher.
Well I hope you had a productive talk with her.
My children's teacher wanted to have a meeting with me and my ex-wife.
What about?
Ever since we split, I guess the kids have been acting out in school.
That is to be expected. What about putting them in counselling?
Ever since Liz and I split, my kids have been doing bad in school.
That can be really rough on kids, I'm not surprised.
I need to do something about this, any ideas?
Maybe set up a meeting with their teacher, they'd probably know ways to help.
That's a good idea, I'll do that.
Good luck.
It was so scary.
Tell me about it.
The bus was coming right at me and I wasn't even on the road.
What did you do?
I jumped into a nearby narrow ditch, and the bus drove right over me, barely missing my body as the tires sunk down.
That was part quick thinking and a lot of luck.
So then I saw the bus coming right towards us.
Oh my God. Where you terrified?
I had no worries.
But you were about to be hit by a bus?
Yes, but the hospital is on the bus route.
You are definitely a glass half full sort of person.
Jesus did you see that?
Holy crap are you ok?
I cant believe I dodged that bus.
It was an inch away from you.
Quick thinking and skills my friend.
Maybe you should pay more attention?
A friend of mine is moving this weekend but couldn't get anyone to help, so I said that I would.
That's really nice of you. Did they have a lot to move?
From what I can remember from the last time I was at their apartment, they don't have a ton.
How long do you think it will take?
He said he rented a truck for half a day, so we'll have to get it done pretty fast.
Be careful not to hurt yourself lifting heavy stuff.
I helped my friend move into their new apartment this weekend, I have a big truck.
That’s very helpful of you.
I went over to theirs early in the morning to start loading stuff up.
Was there a lot of stuff to move?
We had all of it done by noon.
That's so fast.
Lets go help our friend move into his new house.
Sounds like a nice idea. I heard he was having a hard time with all those boxes.
I was going to go to the gym anyways so I needed the exercise anyways.
It does sound like a good workout. Lets bring the radio with us.
Sounds like a great idea.
Hey how are you doing?
I'm good, I heard you were packing for the big move this weekend.
It wasn't me that was moving, it was my friend.
Did she not have anyone else to help her move?
It was just me!
That is very helpful of you.
I'm glad I moved to Texas.
Yeah, was California that bad?
No it was great I just couldn't afford it.
It is very reasonable here in comparison.
I found work so quick as well.
Well I'm glad you moved, otherwise I wouldn't have you as a friend!
I don't think I can make it here in California anymore.
Really, why do you want to leave?
The taxes are just too high and the home prices are insane.
So where are you moving to instead?
I am going to Texas.
Texas seems like such a terrible place to live though, even though it is cheaper.
I miss living in California. But Texas is really nice.
It's different. Why did you move?
The cost of living was way too high in California.
It's cheaper in Texas.
Yes, a lot and I kept my job. Just a new branch.
Oh that makes sense. I'm sure you'll love it there.
I had to tap two people in my lecture today to ask them to quiet down.
What were they doing?
They had been talking for five minutes while the professor was lecturing.
That is really distracting.
What did you say to them to get them to stop?
I just asked them to be quiet so I could hear what the lecturer was saying.
I was giving a lecture yesterday and one of my students kept talking.
Did you get after them?
I tapped him on the shoulder and told him he has to write me a essay on why to not interrupt the teacher.
You should have him clean your classroom as punishment, to teach him a lesson on interrupting
I am so relieved that I am going to graduate.
How did you find that out?
I just took the final exam and finished my course today.
You found out you passed?
I did. I'm so glad since it was a gruelling long semester.
You deserve it for how hard you worked.
I can't believe it's over! I'm done with my last college course.
Yay! Now we can graduate together.
Yes, I can't wait. Let's go out and celebrate. It's been a gruelling semester.
Sounds good to me. Let me get my stuff together and then I'll call you.
Okay, thanks!
This has been the worst semester of high school, but I finally took my last final today and I am officially done!
That must be a great feeling, I can't wait until I graduate next year.
It wasn't easy, I seriously thought about dropping out this semester.
Just think how nice it's going to be to walk across the stage and get your diploma.
My mom will be relieved when I get home and tell her I am graduating, she was pretty worried.
I can't wait to come to your graduation party and celebrate with you!
I had to drive to church today. There was too much snow to walk.
Yeah, this snow storm really hit us hard.
There must be 2 feet of snow on top of the inch we already had down.
Good thing that they clear the streets quickly even if they don't get to the sidewalks.
I hope they listen to me and avoid the deep hole they were nearing
They threw flares by it so I'm sure they will see it.
Maybe we should head over there just to make sure they are safe.
That's probably a good idea just in case.
Let's get ready to head out immediately.
We're only 1000 feet or so to the top but this is the most dangerous part of the climb.
I guess we need to slow down and make sure we have everything.
Yes, and we need to double check our equipment.
Do we have enough oxygen?
Yes, we've got enough oxygen, but we need to check our water.
I'll check that right now.
There is this new product I am so eager for people to try out. I hope it resonates well with others.
I am sure it will. You are good at advertising all the time.
Thanks. I really try to do my best.
There are a lot of people who would be interested in the stuff that you are serving. I think that it is great.
Yeah I have worked a long time on my marketing advertisements.
I can definitely tell.
I hope that I get some interest from this new ad.
I don't see why you wouldn't get any interest at all.
I think it's because people don't have a lot of money to spend right now.
Everyone is trying to save their money for essentials.
Hopefully there's somebody out there were extra cash to spend.
I'm sure there is and they will jump on it.
I think people would like the new ad I put out.
I really like the ad and I think it's really eye catching.
I just think I should have added brighter colours so it would pop out.
That might have helped but I think its okay as is.
Addison is a beast at gaming. No matter how hard I tried, I can't beat him.
When did you play him?
Last night. I played the hardest game Addison owned and he defeated me in no time.
He's kind of pro. He competes against other gamers for money.
I have seen him online. He's amazing.
I wouldn't feel bad if he beats you at a game.
I can't believe I lost that quickly.
Maybe you aren't as good at games as you think you are.
That game is extremely hard though, maybe the hardest game I've ever played.
Maybe you just aren't used to playing games that are actually challenging.
I resent that, and if I practice and play it some more I'm sure I'll beat it.
Good luck with that, I've been playing it for months and haven't gotten hardly anywhere.
I can beat anybody in Mortal Kombat. Anybody.  That includes you, Addison.
Ash, you're crazy. I know you love gaming and all but Addison has been the national Mortal Kombat champion for six years and her record is 1873 and 0.
Because she has never played me before.
Let's make it interesting. I have three thousand bucks that says Addison can beat you in less than 40 seconds.
You're on, ready, go!
Pay up and get out, or, maybe you want to go Double or Nothing?
I am completely and utterly exhausted, not to mention famished!
You seem like you've been through a terrible ordeal.
I was so busy today that I haven't had time to eat either breakfast or lunch.
That's not healthy to skip meals Quinn.
And on top of all that, I almost fainted due to sheer exhaustion.
You need to get some rest, and a meal.
I just started to feel dizzy.
Did you not eat anything, you know you got to with your diabetes.
I wash rushing to get to work on time, and was busy with a meeting and just forgot.
You have to eat small meals or your sugar will drop, you know that!
I was surprised at the intricate heavy knots that he tied.
He is one of the best in the business and uses a strong rope.
The magic trick worked perfectly.
By using the heavy rope, the knots come out quicker.
Thank you for the advice.
I like to play with Kai but he can be rough.
You mean he hurts you?
Not deliberately but he is serious in his play.
What do you mean?
When we play cops and robbers he likes to play the bad cop and bound me with rope with intricate, heavy knots.
That does not sound like play to me.
This is going to be an awesome day. So should I go to the beach or the mountains?
Let's go to the mountains. The lakes are so clean and fun to swim in.
But the beach is just as beautiful and sea salt is good for my skin.
Or we can go to the public pool in the city.
Or maybe Disneyland land or Six Flags?
Or the museum? Wait the sun is going down. You took too long.
It feels kind of weird being in class after taking that much time off.
How long did you take off in between high school and college?
Three years.
That is a long time to have taken off.
Well I have a friend that took even more.
So how does it feel to be back in college?
I'm so nervous about school!
Why are you nervous? You'll do great!
It's just been so long. I graduated high school five years ago!
Look at all the worldly experience you've gained though. You've lived in Europe and Australia! I bet no other freshmen can say that!
That's true. But it still won't help me with math!
Well that's where I come in. I can help you with that.
I finally get to start college.
Didn't you go after high school?
No, I worked so I could help out my family.
It's good that you are going now.
Yeah, I've been saving so I can start going.
Well good luck on your first day!
I didn't go straight to college after high school.
What did you do?
I spent time traveling to different countries. I had a lot of fun.
How long did you travel.
I travelled for three years. Now, I'm enrolled to start my first year of college.
I'm considering doing the same after my graduation.
It was a tough decision but it was one that I had to do.
I support you because you can't allow yourself to work in such an environment.
I just hope that I'm able to find another job that is similar to this.
You're a talented worker so you won't have any issues.
I hope you're right.
Trust me, any company would be willing to take you.
So I did something crazy today. I got so lonely that I got a dog.
What you got a what?
I got a dog its a mixed breed but it she is the most cuddly thing in the world.
Dogs are awesome and great partners.
I love him he is my best bud.
I adopted a dog today! I've been wanting one for a long time so I decided to finally do it.
That is really awesome. I've always had a dog or cat or both.
It's been kind of lonely around the house so I thought this would be perfect.
Have you decided on a name yet?
No, I'm going to wait and see what his personality is like, first.
Last night I decided to get that dog I saw at the shelter.
I'm glad you got a dog, you will feel a lot less lonely now.
You're right, I forgot how nice it is just to have another living thing in the house.
When are you going to bring her over so our dogs can have a play date?
I want to make sure she adjusts to me before I take her around other people and dogs.
That's a good point, I totally agree.
Riley was the one interviewing me for that job I applied for.  He saw me sitting outside and took me into a room to meet.
How'd it go? Did you feel good about the interview.
I'm really not sure. It was hard, since I know Riley so well.
Did you interview with anyone else?
Yes, three other people. The HR person told me I'd hear back by next week.
Good luck. Let me know if you get the job.
I went for my interview yesterday.
How did it go?
I think it went well, you'll never guess who interviewed me.
That's good to hear. Who interview you?
It was Riley, he saw me outside so took me into the interview room.
Wow, what a coincidence.
I went for an interview today.
How did that go?
Riley was scheduled to do the interview and I know him.
Did everything work out?
Riley saw me sitting outside so he took me inside the room.
That must have given you a leg up.
I was so lucky to have my interview today.
What do you mean?
Riley was working today and saw me outside so he took the interview!
That must have been reassuring, having someone you know so well do your interview.
It was, seeing Riley calmed me right down.
Well I hope you get the job!
I saved the meaty bones from our roast today for the dog.
Oh my dog loves those too.
He gets them as a treat sometimes
I give them to mine so he gnaws that instead of the furniture lol.
Yeah, right, that too!
Dogs are the best.
I'll take these leftover bones outside.
What are you doing with them?
I'm tossing them out for the dog.
That's a nice treat.
Yes, it'll chew on them for hours and then bury them.
So, eventually you'll have holes all over the yard.
I hope the dog likes the bones I have.
Where did you get the bones?
They're leftovers from cooking.
Dogs always love bones.
Then my dog should be happy?
The dog will be ecstatic.
This vacuum has been the best thing to happen to me.
Why is it so great?
I sucks up everything, charges in two minutes, it even plays music, its cut my cleaning time in half!
Impressive!
I'd recommend you get one as well.
I'm thinking about it now#.
This has to be one of the greatest products ever.
What exactly makes it so great?
It's able to give me and my family some peace and quiet finally.
If it's so great, I'm going to have to get one myself.
Trust me, once you get it you realize how amazing it is.
You've convinced me, and I've ordered one already.
So you know how rough my face has been all this time with acne and dark spots yeah?
Yeah but your skin looks much better now. Have you used something?
Exactly, I found out about this new face oil and face wash. It has been my daily routine for about 1 month now and it has worked wonders.
Wow that's really good. Your glow was the first thing I noticed when I saw you. You have to tell me about this product.
Thanks I knew you'd be surprised to see the improvement, I am really happy about this, I feel more confident and happy with myself.
Sweet. I am happy for you.
Whew! My dad's been drilling me this past week but it's working.
Really? Drilling you about what?
About how to run our business successfully.
Did it do any good?
Yes, I could see very easily what it takes to succeed.
Good for your Dad then!
I'm so happy for all the lessons my dad gave me in business.
You're running everything now?
Yeah, I took over full time.
Have you had any difficulties?
No, I payed attention closely to the lessons, and now success is easy.
Your dad must have been a good teacher.
I had to stop by the store quickly to get Ash a gift before I went to the party at his house.
I thought he told people not to give him gifts.
He did. But I saw that everybody else had gotten him a gift.
I hope there was still some stores open by that time.
I just got him one of those edible arrangements full of fruits.
I hope it didn't have melons since he's allergic to those.
I got Ash a gift for your birthday, I hope he likes it.
These are the shoes he has wanted for two months!
I found them on eBay and I thought he would like them.
You're such an amazing friend to Ash, I am sure he will like them.
Thank you!
So Brenda is in pretty bad shape.
What's wrong?
She's going through a break up.
I think she needs a lot of extra attention so I've been talking to her a lot.
Okay, I will reach out to her.
She would really appreciate that!
I know she drains me but my heart told me to call her.
You are better than I am. She needs so much extra attention and I can't give it to her.
Well she respects my boundaries so I really just call to be a listening ear for her.
Doesn't all her drama wear you out thought?
It does but that's what friends are for.
Not this friend. You call her and let me know what she says.
My friend is going through hard times. I think I should talk to him.
He probably could use some extra attention. What's going on?
He's strung out and got thrown out by his girlfriend again.
Is he homeless again?
Yes once again. He can't kick his habit. I am afraid I'll find him dead one day.
It's hard to be friends with someone like that.
I felt like chatting to my friend the other day.
What did you talk about?
They had just lost their job, so they needed a lot of extra attention.
They must be having a really tough time.
Definitely, they just needed someone to listen to them.
That was really nice of you.
I know it sucks but I had to do what I had to do.
That is not something that you do to a friend in a competition.
You know how I get when I'm losing.
That is no excuse for that behaviour.
Look I'm not going to fight with you over this.
This conversation is absolutely going nowhere.
So pumped that I won today. It was worth twisting Sasha's ankle.
I don't know, dude. That was kind of messed up.
Come on. She's so full of herself. She deserved to be taken down a peg.
I was really rooting for you to win but I don't think I can support injuring other players.
You're being such a drag. Maybe I should go celebrate with someone else.
Yeah, maybe you should. I don't feel like talking to you right n ow.
I really don't feel bad about hurting Sasha to win the game.
That was a really dirty move man.
She cheats all the time anyway but no one ever notices.
I don't know how she cheats but you actually physically hurt her.
I don't care, I won the game and that is all that matters.
You are kind of a terrible person to be honest.
The other day I was walking in that alley behind my house and I saw a man with a gun robbing an old lady.
What did you do?
I stood there for a second frozen, but then he saw me so I took off running.
Oh my gosh! I bet you were so scared!
Yeah I was. I ran all the way to the police station and made a report.
I hope they catch the guy!
I was at the pawn shop when a robbery happened this afternoon!
How scary, what did you do?
As soon as I saw the robber I ducked and ran out of the store and down to the police station.
I'm glad you got out of there and no one was hurt. Did they catch the criminal?
I'm not sure. They sent some officers and had me fill out a report stating what I saw.
I'll keep an eye on the news to see if they report on a robbery.
It just one more week.
You said that one month ago, I don't believe you anymore.
That was because I lost my job.
Its ok, you can stay as long as you want.
One more week I promise.
Are you sure? its not like I'm kicking you out.
I finished first so I left right away.
Who else was there?
Lee was there and it was she who locked the doors.
I'm glad the work was done in time.
Yes, it has been so stressful.
No we can go fishing this weekend.
I am so glad Jordan came with me today.
What did you guys get up to?
Jordan and I share the same love for birds, so we went bird watching.
Wow that is exciting, it must be hard to find someone who shares that interest.
Yes, I don't know anyone else who loves birds as much as Jordan and I.
Maybe next time I will join you two.
Jordan and I share the same love of birds.
You two should go bird watching together.
We did, last weekend, it was great!
Did you see anything?
Yes, I saw so many rare species.
That is so cool!
I really liked going bird watching with Jordan.
Oh. Did she enjoy it?
Yeah. She shares my love of birds, so it worked out.
Awesome! When will you guys be doing that again?
I'm hoping next week.
Cool. Sounds like you guys have a lot in common.
I wanted to get on the road early so I went to sleep at seven last night.
Are you just getting up?
Yes, twelve hours of sleep so that we get a good start today.
You are all wide eyed. I'm glad you are driving.
I'm ready for the road. You can rest in the back seat if you need to.
I appreciate that you got lots of rest so you can drive.
I feel so refreshed and revitalized!
You certainly look refreshed and alert.
I went to sleep early last night so that I can have a productive day.
That's awesome! I hate being sleep deprived.
Yes, it can make all the difference in your mood.
Yes, maybe I'll sleep in early tonight.
I got a good night's sleep last night so I could be ready for a good day today.
How much sleep did you get in last night?
I think I got in around ten hours because I was so tired and I worked out before bed.
I am actually impressed since I have only got around six hours each night.
Try working out before you go to bed and you will sleep like a baby.
Today I will shop.
Why?
Because of the weather.
What's wrong with the weather?
It's cold, rainy, and dark. A perfect mall day.
Yeah that's true.
Oh my gosh. The weather outside is just terrible.
I know. I stayed in all day. What have you been up to?
I was going to stay in, but I took a trip to the mall.
Oh, nice. How did that go? Did you buy anything?
I got some new sneakers. It was really great. Shopping on a rainy day may be my new thing.
Nice, maybe I'll go with you next time.
Tracy just walked up to me, held out a box and told me to take it.
What was in the box?
A box of my favourite candy was inside. It was a birthday gift. But I didn't know that until I opened it.
That's right it is your birthday. Happy birthday.
Thank you.
Maybe I'll get you a box of that candy too.
I'm glad Tracy came to my party!
Oh I forgot it was your birthday, Happy Birthday!
Thank you!
Di you get anything nice?
Tracy got me a gift, but I haven't opened it yet
I wonder what's inside.
Tracy gave me this birthday gift today.
I didn't even know she knew it was your birthday.
I had no idea either. But I think she wants to be friends.
She seems like a sweet girl. You should be friends with her.
I think it's really nice of her to be so determined.
More determined than me. I forgot about your birthday.
I think I am going to go ahead with the surgery and the procedure Ash suggested.
Okay, I hope you know the medical board approved this and is all down for it.
This is great for research and a faster, less invasive surgery.
Yes, we have done a lot with our robotic surgery arms and it is a very effective process.
Let me know which week I will be scheduled for the operation.
It looks like the best time is going to be in four weeks if that works for you.
I found a world famous surgeon.
Did he perform your operation?
I went to Ash and underwent the new procedure.
He is famous.
Ash had developed the procedure.
You are here so it must have gone well.
I am so thankful for the new procedure Ash developed.
Did you undergo the operation?
I did and I hope it works.
I am sure it will since it's fairly new.
Lets hope so.
The project I'm working on is finally off the ground.
The one you're working on with Kendall?
Kendall was sitting on all the ideas, I'm the one who put them into action.
How does Kendall feel about it?
It doesn't matter how Kendall feels, I took all the credit.
You're quite ruthless in business.
I really screwed over Kendall at work the other day. I know I'm going to regret it!
Come on. It wasn't that bad, was it?
Yeah. I took her ideas and ran with them, then took all the credit when the project became a success.
Well maybe it was her own fault for not taking action herself!
Maybe, but I still should have given her credit for the ideas.
Maybe you can let her run with one of your ideas, then and let her take credit next time.
So if we follow this path and the plan I laid out our profits will be two fold.
Wait a second Kendall came up with that idea!
We don't have time for this nonsense.
You know she did, we talked about it at dinner.
Moving on.
You cant just get away with this.
I did not make the basketball team this year.
I'm so sorry, I know you have been practicing a lot.
Actually, I haven't. I went to the library and read books instead, so I didn't make it.
It sounds like you didn't really want to play basketball.
You're right. If I did, I would have practiced more.
So maybe it's not such a bad thing after all.
I didn't make the basketball team.
Why not?
I didn't practice. I went to the library and read books.
Most kids play basketball instead of studying.
I read that somewhere.
You'll be just fine, kid.
I didn't get on the team?
What do you expect Aubrey you never practiced.
I tried.
No you didn't, even when I tried to help you just went to the library.
Well some of the books were about basketball!
You have to get some real life experience playing the game too.
I cooked a nine course meal for Cameron's friends so they would have something to eat?
What was the occasion?
Nothing special. I wanted to impress his friends.
Were they impressed?
Of course, I have mad cooking skills.  I am a well-trained chef from the French academy.
I love it. You are so sure of yourself.
I'm going to invite Cameron's friends over to the house tomorrow night.
Oh you must be nervous! It's hard meeting your boyfriend's friends.
Yeah I really want them to like me. I'm going to make my famous Mexican quiche.
That is so good! They'll definitely love you after that.
That's what I'm hoping! Do you want to go to the store with me to pick up the ingredients?
Only if you save me some!
I need a band aid for my fist.
Cameron what happened why are you bleeding?
My brother knocked my Lego's over and we fought.
Oh. That sounds awful are you both okay?
Yeah. He's fine but I think I broke my knuckle.
I can take you to the hospital.
I probably should go apologize to my brother.
What'd you do?
I hit him.
Why?
He knocked over the blocks I was playing with.
Well you probably shouldn't have hit him over that.
Hey, I was playing basketball today with Sasha's team.
No kidding, how did it go?
We won, but all the other players were ignoring Sasha.
That stinks! What happened?
I decided to bring the ball to her so she could have a chance to play. She scored!
What a nice thing to do! I bet she was grateful!
I have been busy!
Busy doing what?
I was hired to water the garden for my neighbour.
Do you need a hand?
Thanks! I've already sprayed the hose everywhere.
Okay!
This garden better turn out to be great.
How long have you been working on it?
It's been about two weeks now.
How often do you water it?
Right now it's twice a day, in the morning and in the evenings.
What all is growing in the garden?
How long do you think it will take to water Mrs. Johnson's gardens.
She has a lot flowers, maybe a hour.
Give me the hose so I can spray those flowers over there.
Here you go, we need to turn the water on first.
I woke up this morning in a great mood, feeling very energetic.
Did you have a lot to accomplish today?
No, I just made sure to get a good amount of sleep so I could hit the ground running.
That sounds like something I should be doing.
I'll definitely be making sure to keep this routine up.
I imagine you'll see even better benefits the longer you stay with it.
I felt better than usual this morning.
That's great news. Why do you think?
I have no idea. Life's just been good.
That's good. I hope it lasts.
I try to help people out, that's why I gave that man holding the sign a dollar.
That is good of you to try and help him out but how do you know he isn't lying.
I don't know and never will but I feel it is the right thing to do. He needs it more than I do.
Yeah it is just a dollar. Let him go buy a beer with it if he wants.
Yes, it doesn't matter to me. He could use it to buy anything he wants to.
I gave this guy a dollar today.
Was he a homeless person?
I think so. He had a sign asking for money.
You don't usually give money to people.
He seemed really down.
I hope it made a small difference.
I really like Bailey. I feel like we have so much in common.
That's awesome! It's hard to find friends that are similar to us.
Yes, we have practically all the same interests and hobbies.
How wonderful! I'd like to meet Bailey.
I am sure that I can arrange for that.
Looking forward to that Cameron.
I can't believe Addison found my watch.
Where was it?
It was around the corner from the store.
How did Addison find it?
She said she retraced my steps the day I lost it and managed to find it.
That is so kind of Addison.
Wow, I can't believe after all these days I finally have my watch back.
I didn't even know you had lost it.
Yeah, it went missing last week, but I couldn't remember where I last saw it.
How did you find it after all that time?
Well actually, Addison found it and returned it to me.
Addison is the best.
Hey, guess what? I got my watch back!
Wow, that's great! I thought it was lost for good!
Well turns out that Addison found it, it was around the corner at the store; I must have dropped it there a few days ago.
That's great. You're lucky to have a friend like Addison.
I have been communicating with my loved ones a lot lately.
That's good. Have you been discussing anything in particular?
Mostly their own personal success.
Well you certainly have a lot of experience with that.
That is kind of the idea. I have a clear vision of what they need to do in order to succeed.
That's great that you are being so helpful.
Casey and I laid next to each other in the cool sand the other night.
What did you to get up to?
We just laid there and watched the sun go down.
That sounds lovely.
I laid down by Casey's side in the cool sand. The evening sun was setting.
That sounds lovely.
It was magical. The sky was orange and magenta and the ocean was soothing.
Nature is beautiful.
I love the sea. I can't get enough of it.
Did you go swimming in the ocean?
After years, I was able to watch the sunset yesterday.
You have been so busy for quite a while now.
Indeed. Casey asked me to accompany him to the beach and so I left work early and went there.
How did it feel Kai?
I felt great you know! just lying on the sandy beach next to Casey watching the sun go down. What more could I ask for?
I am glad you enjoyed your evening Kai
It was really nice just spending time with Casey yesterday.
Did you guys do something nice?
I just laid down by her side in the cool sand and watched the sun go down.
That sounds so romantic.
It was. I think she and I are getting serious.
You guys really do make a good couple.
It is a tough job being the manager of the team.
I bet, what are your responsibilities?
I have to make all of the decisions for the team.
What kind of decisions?
For instance I have to determine who plays and who doesn't.
Wow that must be a hard choice.
Many players from my club are mad at me right now.
What did you do Sasha?
Given the responsibility of selecting a good team, I chose members who I deemed fit to make a solid team.
What I don't get is who is upset at you for doing a good job?
Well, the players who I left out have decided not to step foot at the club.
It happens Sasha. Do what's best for your team!
I am not looking forward to making the line-up for the game on Sunday.
Why, what's wrong?
Kendall and Sophia have both had really hot bats lately but I only have room for one.
How will you decide who to use then?
Honestly I think I am going to see if one of them will volunteer to sit out first.
That's a good plan, I just hope one of them helps you out.
I had a tough decision to make with the line-up this weekend.
I heard a lot of people were mad about it.
It's always going to happen like that because you can't make everyone happy.
Understandable, because everyone wants to play.
They sure do, but there are only certain positions that are able to be filled.
I'm sure it's something that they will understand over time.
Ok team. Today the line-up is going to be John, Jacob, Alex, Jones, and Ashley. Don and Markus, the rest of you stay on the bench.
What? But I haven't played all season.
Hey! I'm the manager, and I make the calls.
This is lame. Why did I even sign up, if I'm not even going to be allowed to play?
I saw some dude going through Aubrey's locker.
No way, I she keeps her lunch money and phone in there.
We better check it out.
She also has her make up kit, gym clothes, vape and personal stuff in there.
I know who it was too.
You should tell Aubrey what you saw.
I just finished creating an inventory of items to be sold tomorrow. I am tired.
You should take a break.
I agree. Tomorrow is the big day. The charity auction will start early.
If I find time tomorrow I will be in attendance.
Thank you. I will save a spot for you.
What time will it kick off?
It's kind of funny that Jan can't even reach the top shelf.
I bet she doesn't find it funny though!
Sorry, I didn't mean to make her upset, it was just kind of funny that she are shorter than the rest of us.
That might make her sad and insecure now.
She really needs to relax, it was all in good fun.
Well it was not funny to me either.
I was laughing so hard at Jan the other day.
What did she do that was so funny?
I made fun of her when she couldn't reach something on the top shelf in the kitchen.
I'm guessing she didn't appreciate that.
It made her sad. But I couldn't help it.
I hope you don't make fun of me since I'm short too.
What are you trying to do in the kitchen, Jan?
She is trying to reach the oil, it's on the top shelf.
She looks like a dwarf.
That's not nice, why would you say that about Jan?
It was just a joke.
Not funny.
Have you heard that my good friend Pat is running for local mayor in the election?
I saw a few campaign posters with his name on it.
You should really consider voting for him!
Well, I'm not registered to vote.
That's a shame. I've been contacting all my friends in important positions so they can support Pat with their influence.
I wish your friend the best of luck for the election results.
I hope Pat wins the local election. I'm trying to help him in any way I can.
Me too! What are you doing for Pat?
I have a lot of contacts in the local government, so I'm putting in a good word for him.
Every little bit helps!
I used my contacts on Facebook, Twitter and TikTok for get my friends to vote for Pat.
Wow, Ash, that is so brilliant and innovative.
I figured if I share Pat's plans with my friends then they would tell their friends and so on.
I never realized you could do that. Wow, technology is amazing.
They will love Pat's plans and ideas to make a better country.
I am definitely going to vote for Pat too!
It's been so nice to get involved in my friend's campaign.
Yeah I think I've seen those ads lately.
Oh awesome. I'm glad the message is being seen.
Yeah I was a big fan of the ad. I'll definitely vote for him.
That means a lot! I hope you can spread the message.
I definitely will! I'll tell my friends about it.
I have really been trying to get healthier.
Really? Why is that?
I just feel like I should be watching my health more.
That's a good thing to be keeping an eye on. What have you been doing?
Well, mostly eating really healthy. No processed foods, no fast food, a lot of salads and that kind of stuff.
Good for you. I should do that too.
You know I've been taking better care of my body and watching what I put into it.
Yes, I've seen the results, you look great!
I found a new health food restaurant that I would like to try.
We should go for lunch there.
I've heard they do some amazing stuff with couscous.
I've never had couscous, it will be a new experience for me.
I have great news!
Oh what is it?
You remember that job I applied for? The one at the big law firm?
Yes! Did you get a call back?
Not just that, but they offered me the job! I start on Monday!
Wow that's fantastic! You've been wanting to work for them for a while. Congratulations!
Guess what. I got the job!
Oh, wow, at the law firm?
Yes.
That's amazing. I know you worked really hard for it too.
Yes, I was worried that someone else had got it.
Well, I'm proud of you. Congratulations, Tracy!
I got a great job at a law firm.
Is this the firm you wanted to work for?
I interviewed at several firms but was hoping to hear from this one.
You must have been very excited by their decision.
You are absolutely correct.
I wish you the best of luck at working where you want to be.
Barker is still missing, we have looked all over for him.
How did he get out this time?
I was home alone and didn't want to cook, pizza guy came to the door and he pushed his way out the door.
You need to put a fence up, so he stops doing that.
I plan to, if we can find him this time. I called all the local shelters.
I can't believe this dog ran away again.
That's two nights in a row now.
I'm done babysitting this dog for them.
Don't you mean dog sitting?
With this dog, it's babysitting.
I hope they pay you well.
The dog I watched last night kept me on my toes.
Why, what happened?
I ordered some pizza and when the I opened the door, the dog ran out.
Did it scare the pizza guy?
The dog I was watching got out last night!
How did that happen?
He slipped out when the pizza delivery person came.
That's awful, did you manage to find him?
I did, but by that time my pizza was cold.
That is such a shame!
I got into an accident yesterday at a four way stop.
Did you run the stop sign?
No, someone else did! I came to a complete stop first but he keeps saying he did.
Don't you have a dash cam?
Yes, I do and I've already sent the footage to the insurance company.
Thank goodness you're all right.
Did you see how all the other cars looked like they were going through the stop sign?
I did. You all approached it evenly but you were the first to stop.
It seems like that happens every time I get to this stop. It scares me.
You have to watch other drivers as much as yourself out here.
Yeah. There are lots of accidents at this stop so I am always extra cautious.
Smart girl.
I'm out doing errands right now.
Anything interesting happen on the streets?
I came to a four way stop, I'm not sure people know the etiquette in those situations.
Was there an accident?
Luckily no, but I was the first one to come to a complete stop.
It's better to be cautious in those situations.
I saw a good movie the other day.
What was the movie called?
Parasite. I would like to see it again in theatres with friends.
Would you like to go some time this week?
Yeah, what day are you free?
I am free Friday after dinner.
I really appreciated Alex spending his day off with me.
That is really nice of Alex.
We had a great time!
What did you do while you were there?
We went for ice cream!
I had a great time last night at the movie theatre.
Me too. I had been waiting on that movie to come out for, like, three years.
I was looking forward to it too. But I think we made that lady mad that was behind us.
I know we did! She told us to please shut up then she changed seats all the way to the back.
Do you think we should have apologized?
No. She should try to understand that we are huge fans and we weren't being disrespectful, we were just enjoying a great movie.
I got thrown out of the movies last night.
What? Were you throwing popcorn or something?
No, my buddies and I were talking to loud according the guy in front of us. He told the manager.
I don't blame him! I hate it when people talk at the movies.
I forget that I'm in a theatre sometimes and think that I'm at home.
Well you're lucky I'm not the manager or I'd ban you for life!
This movie is really good i cant stop laughing so hard.
I think the people behind us are getting mad at us for being too loud.
We should calm down before we get kicked out of here.
Sorry, I just got so excited and I think we overreacted.
It would suck to get kicked out of a movie theatre.
I had to get up so early for my new job.
That's okay. Just be glad that you have a new job.
Oh, I am. I just wish I could work later in the day.
A lot of people would be willing to wake up early for your job.
I am going to go home now and go to bed.
Wow, it's really early for you to call it a night, do you feel well?
Yeah, I am fine, I am just starting a new job in the morning.
Oh, that's great but it's still pretty early tonight.
Yeah, I have to be up very early in the morning to get there on time.
Oh, that makes sense, good luck tomorrow.
Trust me it's a walk that you don't want to make.
How long did it take you?
It was over an hour in the snow.
It wasn't cold though.
Thankfully it wasn't, if it was colder out I would have had to call somebody for a ride
You should've done that anyways.
I think I'm too tired to come over to play video games today.
Why is that?
I missed the school bus and had to walk home from school.
Isn't your house like a few miles away from the school?
It is. That's why I'm so tired.
It's okay. We can just play video games online.
I'm so tired from walking.
How long have you been walking?
I walked all the way home from school.
You didn't have a ride to take you home?
No, I missed the bus because I had to stay late.
The school should arrange transportation for students that stay late.
Bailey was having a hard time in her relationship!
I noticed her husband was being mean!
I noticed too, but I gave bailey the best advice on how to handle it.
Did she take to the advice?
I believe she will.
I finally won the race this year.
You did? I am so happy for you, Cameron.
Thanks, I mean I trained extremely hard for it.
I know you did, it was frustrating because I wanted to hang out with you for a long time but you were always busy.
Well it paid off at least. I mean last year I almost lost.
Hopefully you will win again next year too.
I want to win the race again this year.
You have been training for a year!
I trained extra hard last year, because last time I only won by 3 inches.
The practice you have put in, it's going to make a difference!
I think I really need to work hard this year so I can win the race.
I heard last year you barely won.
It really came down to the wire but luckily I got a burst of energy at the end.
You trained so hard this year I don't think you will have any problem.
I thought I was going to be able to move without hiring anyone.
Did you have to hire someone?
Yes, the sofa was not fitting in my truck.
Oh, so your truck was not big enough for the sofa.
Nope, then I hired someone in order to move it for me.
I'm glad you had it planned out as to what would happen if the original option didn't work.
Would you mind helping me move this sofa? It won't fit in my truck.
Yeah if you help me carry it.
Yeah I will help you carry it. I really appreciate your help. I think I will hire someone to help with the rest.
That would be helpful.
I think I will get them to come over tomorrow morning.
The morning should be great.
Oh my goodness I need to get out of this water immediately.
Kai, you are covered in mud right now.
Okay hand me the hose and I will wash myself off.
Okay, here you go.
Thanks, let me just spray this on me.
That's much better, you are clean now.
That muddy pond left us wet and dirty so I'm glad I had extra towels with me.
I bet they were glad too. That pond water is brown.
Yes. Now all my white towels are brown but that is ok.
Some bleach should get them back to white.
Yeah. Next time that we get in the pond I'll bring my brown towels.
Are you all really going to get back in that muddy pond water?
This pond we are in is way too muddy.
I know, mud is everywhere.
We need to get the mud off ourselves.
Try using this bottle of water.
Ok, I will pour the bottle of water on both our chests.
I fell in the pond.
You are soaked from head to toe.
It was muddy in there.
I can see that.
In the end I got the dirty water out of my hair and off my chest.
You still need a bath.
I have been very impressed by the quality if work of one of my members
Do you plan to reward them?
Yes. I have recommended them for a promotion and pay bump.
I bet they are going to be very happy about that.
I was so proud of myself at work today.
I heard about you getting called in for a promotion.
He said he was giving me a raise because the quality of my work was so good.
I'm so proud of you. Maybe I can get one too if I work hard this week.
You can always try I guess.
My friends really enjoyed the stories I told them.
Did you make the stories up?
No, they just found the experiences that I had been through interesting and funny.
Did you tell them about the shark event?
That is the one they found funniest.
I found it hilarious too.
I'm glad I could be my friends entertainment today.
You're always a very entertaining person.
It's just that I have a lot of stories I could tell.
And you do a great job telling them as well.
I guess not everyone has the ability to tell a good story.
Nope, it's a gift that you have.
I love riding a boat.
You have always been interested in the waters.
One time, my anchor broke as I dropped it.
That is scary.
We drifted in the sea and were astray for weeks.
I am glad I was not there.
I'm glad to be back on shore!
Where were you?
I was boating and got lost for weeks.
Did you have food and water?
Yes, luckily I had enough to last me.
You are extremely lucky.
Aubrey really surprised me last night.
Did she make the first move or something?
You could say that!
No way! So are you guys official now?
Yes, finally, I've had a crush on her forever.
Wow, you're so lucky.
Aubrey finally made a move on me today. I think I got to second base.
Oh my god! What happened?
Let's just say she unzipped my pants.
Wow, that's more than second base! You almost got to home plate!
Aubrey and I took our relationship to the next level yesterday.
Wow that's great for you two.
I have wanted to be with Aubrey for as long as I could remember.
I am so pleased for the two of you.
I think we are now officially together.
We should all celebrate.
It was scary. Aubrey fell out of the boat when a shark crashed into our boat on our fishing trip.
Were you guys okay?
We were all traumatized but we survived it. It took a bite out of our boat but luckily it was still intact enough for us to make it back to shore.
Did Audrey wear a life jacket?
Yes, she had just put one on so she was able to float in the water while she was freaking out.  I finally grabbed her hand and pulled her back on.
You are so lucky to have survived a shark attack.
I can't believe she's gone.
What happened? Talk to me, Ted.
Aubrey died, she fell out of the boat after a shark attacked us. He bit her and she died of her wounds.
Oh, Ted. I'm so sorry. That's awful. Is there anything I can do?
Nothing. Nobody can do anything, nobody can bring her back. All we wanted to do was have a nice peaceful fishing trip, and then this happened.
I don't know what to say, Ted. This tragedy is beyond words.
Oh my God. I'm never going on another boat trip again!
What's wrong did you get sea sick?
No, worse. We were fishing, and a shark hit the boat. Aubrey fell out!
Oh my God! Is Aubrey ok? What the heck happened?
She is ok. I pulled her in and we sped to shore. She was shaken up and had some cuts and bruises.
Thank God! I can't believe that happened!
I love my new tan.
Did you go to the tanning salon?
No, I spent all day at the beach so it's a nice and thick brown.
That sounds like the perfect tan.
I finally got my check from the government now.
Oh great, what was it actually for?
It was for filing my taxes for the previous year.
You got money back so that is really awesome.
Now I'm going to go and buy myself a new phone.
Yeah, that's a perfect use for that extra money.
Look at what I got in the mail today!
Wow that is a lot of money.
I know! I got a check from the government.
But I thought you filed your taxes late?
I did but they still accepted my return.
Cool, let's go to dinner!
I finally got my tax return check!
That's great news. I bet you are excited.
I am, I have been waiting for it to come in for a long time.
Are you going to buy anything fun with it?
I'm not sure. I need some new work clothes, but I'd really like a new guitar.
Can you get both?
I finally received a check from the government after filing my taxes for last year.
You did good.
That doesn't usually happen with me. The past couple of years that I've filed taxes, I've owed the government.
It feels amazing to get some money back.
I was so happy when I saw my check.
You can go celebrate now.
I got my tax return today.
Great! I hope it's a lot.
Yes, it's pretty good. It's sort of nice to get the money now even though it's previous year's income.
I know it's a bit of saving in advance.
Yes and now I can put it away for a rainy day.
Definitely save your money!
The goal is to find the pirates treasure. I took out my interactive treasure map and clicked the question mark for another clue.
That reminds of the treasure hunts we used to go on when we were kids.
This is pretty much the same just more high tech.
You've never lost your sense of curiosity. You are just like that girl I played with.
I think we all keep a part of our childhood.
Some of us don't have that luxury.
My treasure map is interactive. It will guide us to the treasure.
Who hid the treasure and what is it? I hope it's nothing lame.
My dad hid it. He said it's two tickets to the football game for you and me. Then, he made the map.
I really want to go to that game. Click on that question mark for another clue. Let's get on with it.
It says it's between two boulders.
Look over there! Two boulders! Get out the shovels. I think we found the treausre.
This treasure hunt is really interesting.
Is that the new game you're playing?
Yeah. All I have to do is press the question marks on the interactive map and then it gives me a new hint.
Sounds like a great game.
It's really fun. Makes me feel like I'm on an adventure.
So if you find the treasure, can you share it with me?
Earlier today I was riding my bike and my friend ran over a curb and slammed into the concrete.
Was he injured? That sounds horrible.
He was fine, just some scrapes and cuts. He is lucky he was wearing a helmet.
Did he fall on his head?
Yes, his head slammed the concrete. He would be badly injured if he didn't have his helmet on.
Glad to hear he is fine, that's a scary thing to go through.
I had this great idea for a start up company. I shared it with Carson and he told me it was very risky.
High risk high reward, right?
That's how I operate. I'll still try to see if I can raise money for it.
If it's a great idea, other people will see it's potential and invest in it.
I hope so. I still need to iron out a few things.
You are such an entrepreneur. Good luck with that.
I realized yesterday that I spend so much time in the gym, I'd really like to get more fresh air.
Well have you tried outdoor activities like hiking or biking?
I'm not much for biking but I'd love to go hike sometime.
We should go together! I know some great trails in the area.
That sounds awesome! I want to start off with something that won't be too difficult.
Ok, I know a trail that is relatively flat with not too many hills.
The cascade mountains are so beautiful. I wish I lived out here.
Yeah dude if you ever want to come visit me again just let me know.
I don't think I can go back to living on the east coast man.
I feel you. The west coast just doesn't compare to the east coast.
Seriously. Everything is flat out there.
I'll trust you on that even though I've never been out there.
I was thinking of going hiking this weekend and could use a partner for safety.
I like to hike, as long as it is not too difficult a trail. What type of trail were you planning on doing?
My plan was to go on one that was not overly easy.
I will go with you if you go on one that is a medium difficulty. Would you consider a trail that is on one of the smaller local mountains and less than 10 miles?.
That sounds good!
Let's get a map and pick a trail, and plan our supplies and timing.
I want to go hiking this weekend.
That sounds like fun, where do you want to go?
I'm thinking about Acadia national Park.
They do have nice trails there.
Would you care to join me?
Sure, I'll just have to check my schedule first.
I have realized me and Remy are very similar.
How do you figure?
Everyone that gets to know us tells us we are pretty much the same.
I agree with that, you guys are similar.
I never realized it until now, which is cool.
Yeah having similar siblings is awesome.
Remy is my sister!
Yes! I noticed that.
The more everyone got to know us, they realise we seem a lot like each other.
I think you guys are a lot alike.
For real?
Yes for real.
You will never believe what I did today. I made a cake and spent hours decorating it for a birthday.
Yum! Save me a piece.
I'm not done yet. I picked it up and it dropped out of my hands.
Oh no. That's awful! Did you catch it?
I tried to but it smashed on the floor. I was devastated.
I just dropped the cake.
You didn't try to catch it?
I did but it fell to the floor fast.
I'm sorry to hear that. Can you buy another one?
Yes, but I'm sad I lost the first cake.
There's no point in crying over spilt milk.
Are you at the table in the cafeteria?
Yeah, I'm waiting for you.
I'll be right there, oh no!
What happened?
I spilled food everywhere in front of everyone, I just want this moment to end.
Just play it cool and head to the table.
I had spilled my food all over the floor, so embarrassing.
Was it at your house?
No I was at a friend's, I felt like I wanted the moment to end right there.
As long as you cleaned it up, it's just an accident don't worry.
I did, I just feel shameful.
Mistakes happen all the time.
I'm looking for a new job do you have anything?
We aren't hiring but I know a couple people who are hiring.
Do you think you can get me the information?
Of course, what happened with your job?
I was caught leaving work early and was fired for it.
Someone must've told on you.
Do you want to go the beach tomorrow?
Sure, but don't you have work tomorrow?
Not anymore. I got let go yesterday.
Seriously, why?
They said I was always leaving early and stealing company time.
Oh man, I'm sorry. Okay, let's hit the beach tomorrow.
I don't think it is worth it to get in an argument with Jesse over such a small thing.
I just feel like you both overreacted a little bit and it wasn't a big deal.
I just don't see why I should have to wear a mask in the store.
I think it is for everyone's health so that people will feel safe around others.
Well, I guess that makes sense to me.
My hands are so cold.
Why are they cold?
I went playing in the snow.
Were you wearing gloves?
No, I don't have gloves, but I love the snow.
You should wear gloves to keep your hands warm.
My hands are freezing! Do you think it could be frostbite?
It could be, I don't know, as I am not a doctor.
My hands are all red and my fingers are numb.
I don't understand why you never wear mittens.
I hate having anything covering my hands as I love to feel the texture of the snow.
Maybe you should start wearing mittens.
School is closed today and I have all day to play outside in the snow.
I don't like playing out in the snow. It is too cold.
Ah, it isn't that bad. I never even wear mittens. I am use to the cold. I love it.
You know you really shouldn't do that because you can get frostbite.
Well my hands really do get kind of cold but I'm just use to it.
Don't forget those mittens next time you go outside.
I practically got frostbite yesterday playing in the snow since I didn't have mittens!
Why didn't you just wear mittens?
I don't know. I just find them uncomfortable, and I convince myself I don't need them.
Maybe next time you'll remember how your hands feel now!
You'd think that would work, but I bet it doesn't. And I'll go in the snow without mittens again.
Then you'll deserve to get frostbite!
I just love playing out in the snow.
Oh, I don't. It's just so cold.
Strangely enough I don't agree with you.
What do you mean?
Well I just wear a sweater when I'm out and I don't wear gloves.
Well, that's weird.
I'm just making space in the fridge for the eggs and milk I bought.
I had no idea we didn't have anymore.
I drink milk and eat eggs a lot.
Why do you eat a lot of them?
It's good for my diet since I'm working out.
I guess I didn't know that since I don't work out.
I had to run to the store to grab a few things.
The corner store, or the actual grocery shop?
The grocery store, I needed eggs and milk.
Okay, do you need help unloading.
No, I'll put them in the fridge right now, thank you though.
No worries.
I finally have eggs in the house. I went shopping for eggs and milk today and found some.  I've put the eggs in the fridge if you want any.
I couldn't find eggs anywhere.
I found them at the local supermarket. They got a big shipment.
How many eggs did you buy?
I bought three cartons. You can have one if you want.
You are always looking out for me.
I went shopping today to get milk and eggs, and I actually remembered to put the eggs in the fridge.
Do you usually forget to do that?
I wouldn't say usually, but it has definitely been known to happen.
I always try to put everything away as soon as I get home, so I don't forget.
I try to do that, but sometimes I get distracted. Especially if my dog comes up to me when I get home.
Oh, I can totally see how that could happen.
I'm bummed that the refrigerator stopped working today.
Well, at least your refrigerator is usually empty.
It's not today. I went to the grocery store and bought some eggs and milk.
Oh no. Did you put those items in the fridge?
Yes, I put the eggs in the fridge as soon as I got home, though I drank most of the milk already.
Well, I can help you finish the rest before they go bad.
I took my mom to the carnival and showed her all the clowns with their different make up on.
Did she enjoy herself?
She was fascinated by the clowns.  She went to the circus a lot when she was a kid.
The clowns probably reminded her of her childhood.
I think so.  She told me she wants to go back again next year when they are in town.
You should take her.
My mom isn't speaking to me today.
How come? Didn't you spend the day together yesterday?
Yeah. I took her to the carnival. But I did something really mean.
What mean thing could you do at a carnival? Did you steal her cotton candy or something?
No worse. She is really scared of clowns, and I took her on the fun house ride knowing that there was a room full of scary clowns at the end. She started to cry.
Oh that's terrible! And funny too! But I don't blame her for not speaking to you.
After class it was raining today!
I knew it would rain, the cloud shows it earlier in the morning
Yes! I gave Alex a ride home, he was going to walk home.
Were you able to meet your schedule for the day?
I was!
okay.
Alex was glad I saw him as he was starting to walk home in the rain.
I bet he really didn't want to hang out at the school waiting for it to stop. did he give you some money for gas in return?
No but it wasn't that far.
That's really nice of you. You barely know each other.
Well we've known each other since elementary school. But now we're starting to become friends after I gave him a lift home.
Cool! That was a really nice thing to do.
The rain storm came fast and I noticed Alex running so I offered him a ride.
I know Alex was glad that you came along.
Yeah. He got into the car and said he was grateful.
Timing is everything.
Yeah. I was happy to have that time with Alex. We really got to talk.
Good. Did you clear the air about your last conversation with Alex?
I have to go into work to cover for Jan again today
oh really? Is she still not feeling very well?
no she say's she's been feeling very unwell and is waiting to hear back on her results from a COVID test
I hope for her sake the test results come back negative
I had to do someone else's job for them today. Ugh.
Why, what happened?
Jan is sick with the COVID so I had to do her job and mine.
Wow, that's a long day huh?
Yeah, still not done with everything. She may have to do some in 14 days if she is better.
Well, I hope she gets better and back to work soon. Stay healthy and safe.
I'm very impressed with Skylar.
Good call hiring her as our personal assistant.
Anything I need, she does without question.
She does always come through and quick.
Yes, she's very reliable.
We should give Skylar a raise.
The Skylar hire is one of the best decisions I made.
Yes, she is great.
She is fantastic and always takes care of everything.
Very cool. I wish everyone else could be a bit more like Skylar.
Alex kept ignoring me the other day.
Did you say anything to him about it?
I found him and told him how it felt to be ignored.
That takes a lot of courage.
It was hard, but I did it.
You're a strong person.
I feel like Alex is ignoring me. We have always been great friends but recently I feel like he is trying to phase me out.
That's awful, I'm so sorry. Did something happen between the two of you?
I keep going over that in my head. The last couple of times we did talk he seemed kind of distant, but I don't think anything specifically happened.
Now that you mention it, I have noticed that Alex has been more distant. I don't think he is singling you out.
Maybe that's the case, but he is ignoring me. Has he been doing that to you?
No, we have talked. I think it has been in clipped conversations but we spoke not that long ago. I really don't think it is anything personal against you.
I bought a new phone.
Wow. Was it expensive?
Yes, it really was.
I guess you got people's attention?
Yes, everyone saw how cool it was and wanted it
Okay
It looks like I'm the most popular person right now
It's not you it's your phone.
It can't just be my phone, I play a role in this too.
When did you pick this phone up?
I just recently bought it.
How much cash did it set you back?
Do you like the new phone that I bought?
Oh wow, did you get it today?
Yeah, I literally just bought it an hour ago.
I love it! I think I am going to buy one.
You really should, it is not even that expensive right now.
That's good to know.
The class isn't gonna be able to go on the field trip because of me.
What did you do?
I kept talking to my friend in class even though the teacher had warned me.
I bet the class is mad at you.
Not really. The field trip was to the museum of old office equipments.
that doesn’t sound like a fun school trip.
I was having a deep conversation with my friend then the teacher came in.
Did you get in trouble?
Yeah I kind of did.  My teacher told me I was holding the class up by talking so he didn't take us on the trip.
Wow.  That's horrible.
I felt like that was my punishment.  The class was so mad at me.
Did you learn your lesson?
My class couldn't go on our trip the other day.
Why? What happened?
I was talking to my friend and the teacher got angry.
They must have been pretty angry to stop the entire class from going on the trip.
Yeah, she was extremely mad.
Well, I guess that will teach you not to talk to people during class in the future!
I got Amy that watch I was telling you about.
Did she like it?
Yeah, I took it over to her house last night and gave it to her.
You spent a lot of money on that watch, maybe she will quit questioning if you care about her.
I was listening to my friend Jacob talk about how to fix the blown out tire on my car.
Oh yeah, I didn't know that Jacob knew much about cars.
He was very upset and I caused him to blow out the tire by distracting him.
That really sucks but Jacob should of been paying attention.
He wasn't and he told me everything wrong about how to fix the tire but I just nodded my head in fear.
That is not a good situation at all but hope that he can take the car to a shop and fix it.
Lee packed my bags for me for my trip but she has packed so much!
Why so much?
I think she's worried about it and she put double of everything just in the case.
Oh she worries about you.
I know. I guess it makes her feel better that I won't run out.
Yeah I think you might be right.
Lee has packed my begs for me ahead of my tip but has packed two of everything.
wow that must be heavy to carry
I'm not sure I will be able to carry it to the plane. There is so much stuff in my bags.
Do you need to bring two of everything?
Not at all I may have to unpack somethings before I leave.
That might be a good idea.
I tripped when I headed towards Robin.  I just fell on my face.
Are you okay?
I didn't break any bones but I had to get a couple of stitches on my chin.
Did you break open the skin?
I had a long gash. The doctor told me a couple of stitches would help it heal faster.
That sounds like a pretty bad fall.
I was about to ask robin to prom but I fell walking to her so I ran away.
Did she even realize you were coming to talk to her?
No, but I heard her laughing.
Anyone laughs when someone falls, it is only natural.
She probably thinks I am just a gigantic goofball.
Some girls like big goofballs.
That speech I gave was a bummer.
I thought you worked pretty hard on it this past week, what happened?
I couldn't keep my head focused on where I was at in it. Kept stuttering a lot through it.
I'm sorry that happened, what did you do?
Just fumbled my way through until it was over with. I feel bad.
Tracy, you did the best you could. Don't beat  yourself up over it.
Did you find it yet?
No, I'm still looking.
It's gone I've been looking for ages and still can't find anything.
Found it, here it was behind the bags.
Wow! It was behind the bags, I've been looking for hours. Thank you Cameron.
No problem Carson.
Cameron found the things I've been looking for, for ages.  He gave them back to me.
What things?
They were a bunch of notebooks that I wanted to keep.  I thought I had thrown them out when I moved.
That's nice of Carson to give them back to you.
He's a swell guy.  I told him I'll treat him to dinner.
He deserves it for finding your things.
Can you help me out? I'm not really sure on how to get this task done.
Shouldn't you ask the manager for help with that?.
I did but I still don't really get it and I'm too scared to ask again.
So what exactly is the issue?
The numbers of this task do not add up how should I proceed.
I see, well it's simple allow me to explain.
I met Aubrey on the first day she moved into my building, and immediately I fell in love with her!  Four months later, we were a steady thing!  It was just like Leonard and Penny on Big Bang Theory!
LOL, really?  Is she as hot as Penny?
Of course she is!
I always thought Penny was very attractive in that show.!
Well hey...there's Aubrey right now coming down the hall. 
Oh wow! She really is very beautiful.
Aubrey and I have decided to date one another exclusively.
I thought you guys were already exclusive.
No, we spent a few months just getting to know one another.
That is what dating to know one another.
Well together we made that decision to be exclusive and have started dating. So she's my girl.
I'm happy for you two. Next comes marriage.
Well Aubrey are dating now.
Wow, how did that happen?
Well, we've been hanging out and having a lot of fun together, we found that we really have a lot in common
That is really great news.  she's such a sweetheart and a really good person
She really is.  We thought we'd give it a shot and went to dinner and dancing last weekend
Sounds great, when do you meet the parents?
I had to work really late last night.
Why did your schedule get so disrupted?
First it was getting a colleague to cover my shift for a doctor's appointment. Now I'm paying him back.
Does he usually work the night shift?
Only one night per week.
I haven't seen the doctor in over a year, so I've not had this problem for a while.
I was able to go into work late last night because my partner covered for me.
Well that's nice to have someone that will cover for you.
It is and it allows me a lot more flexibility at work.
I wish I had that sort of situation set up. I always have to be there and usually way past my shift end.
Maybe I can get you a position with us.
I would be interested in that if you are serious.
I took a boat on the lake for the first time recently and I have to say it was great.
I love boating. Where did you go?
I went to that lake past my house.
I have never been to that lake, but I have heard it is wonderful.
It was great! I caught 10 fish!
Wow, 10 fish? That is pretty good for your first boat excursion.
That boat ride and fishing trip was so much fun.
So you had to rent a boat to go finishing?
No, I could had gone fishing any where but I wanted to take a fishing boat trip
Man I wish that I could had gone with you.
Maybe next time.
Sure just let me know when you are ready
I didn’t really enjoy fishing all that much but being out on that big boat was great!
So you weren't too keen on the fishing itself then? 
No not really, I found it quite boring to be honest
I've heard that when it comes to fishing you either love it or hate it
I don't know if I hated it, I'll try again some day but I'm on no rush to do it again
that sounds like a good idea
I went fishing on the lake the other day.
did you take the boat out?
Yeah I did it was fun
Nice! Have you been fishing before.
No that was my first time actually
would you go fishing again?
I was out on the lake the other day fishing with my family
Oh lovely! It was great weather for fishing yesterday, did you catch anything? 
unfortunately not but we still had a good time, we're gonna go again next week.
that sounds nice, hopefully you have a bit of better luck next time you go.
I hope so, I might bring some better gear with me next time.
That sounds like a good plan, a net and some binoculars may help next time.
I don't know why but the way Robin's eyes looked I knew she was up to no good.
What do you mean?
For the past couple of weeks I had a feeling she was smoking, the way she responded and the extra laziness. So I decided to check her room when she was out..
That's horrible! Did you find anything?
Luckily it wasn't as bad as I thought. But not too fond of this vape thing, gonna have a talk with her.
Good luck, she won't be happy that you sunk in her room, kids these days and their innovative drugs...
Robin was acting very paranoid when I left this morning.
What did she say that seemed off?
She didn't say anything, but kept waiting around for me to leave like she wanted to do something secret.
Maybe she thinks you're on drugs again and is going to search your stuff.
That's a waste of time, I don't do drugs anymore.
You should tell her that when you get home to put her mind at ease.
I can't believe Robin searched my room without permission!
That's unacceptable not to mention illegal.
Robin has been accusing me of smoking drugs ever since we became roommates.
He seems quite paranoid. You should tell your landlord.
I will, first thing tomorrow morning.
Robin needs to know that this is not ok to violate privacy.
My mom thought I was doing drugs so she snuck into my room while I was at school.
Are you sure she did that?
Yeah, I could tell someone had been in my room.  I actually keep it pretty neat and stuff had been moved around.
Did she find anything?
No way! Do you think I'm stupid enough to leave anything I don't want her to find in my room?
I guess not. Hopefully she'll get off your back since she didn't find anything.
What were you doing whilst you waited for me to pick you up?
Not much, was just petting my cat before you arrived.?
Did you not want to bring your cat.
I did but I'll be back later today, would have been a hassle to take care of my cat whilst I'm out.
that's understandable, is it an old cat you have?
Nope he's still a kitten actually.
I and the cat waited for the cab to take him to his new life!
I feel for the cat. he will miss his family!
I had to pet the cat!
He will get used to the new family.
Yes, I guess.
It's time for a new life.
Your bags are packed and you're ready to go.
I'm waiting for the cab right now.
Here, say goodbye to my new kitten.
I am going to pet your cat for luck.
She likes that very much.
I am petting a cat with very soft fur.
I love cats. Where did you find it?
I am sitting with a the owner while waiting for a cab to take me to my new life.
I will be there to visit you as soon as I am off work.
The Nutcracker is so magical and inspiring.
Do you watch it often?
All the time, especially around Christmas with my family. It's changed my life.
How could a work of art change your life?
It made me decide to go to an academy to learn to be a ballerina.
Sounds like the Nutcracker really had a profound effect on you.
I always wanted to be a ballerina and now I'm in regular lessons.
What made you think of that type of dance?
I saw the Nutcracker one Christmas with my family in New York and was blown away.
The dancing is beautiful in that ballet.
It really moved me and I am finally dancing now.
I hope I see you on Broadway someday!
I never realized how graceful ballerinas were until I watched the Nutcracker.
Was that what made you want to become a ballerina? 
yeah it was! I just love it so much.
have you performed in the Nutcracker yourself?
Nope but I hope to one day soon.
That would be spectacular if you did.
I still can’t find my wallet, I'm starting to get worried.
We looked everywhere at my house, did you find it at home?
No, so I decided to go to the store where I work and look through the windows because the store was closed for the night.
So did you happen to see your wallet at the store?
Yes! I saw it on the counter, but I can't get it until tomorrow because the store is closed. And my driver license is in it.
Let's go to the club anyway, maybe you won't get carded...remember, it's karaoke night!
I am so frustrated!
What happened Kai?
Well, I think I lost my wallet, the last place I saw it was at my house
did you go back and search for it?
yeah but I could not find it!
Im so sorry to hear that, that must feel bad.
Have you by any chance seen my wallet?
No, last time I saw you with it was at my house this morning.
Do you mind if we run back to your house to check if its there?
Nope, just give me a few minutes and ill be ready to head back.
I didn't see it anywhere, did you?
Sorry man, no luck on this end either.
I went back to my house to find my wallet but it wasn't there.
You must have left it somewhere.
I hope not.  I don't want to lose my wallet.
It doesn't mean it's lost.  I have people return my wallet to my home.
If someone finds it, I hope it's returned. I don't want to have to cancel all my cards and get them replaced.
That is a huge hassle.
Life is getting tough for me. I can barely pay my bills.
I am sorry about that. What happened to your job?
They had to let me go after posting poor results for two months.
Have you tried applying for other jobs?
I have tried but I haven't been lucky.
Don't give up. You will be on your feet in no time.
I wish I could go out to dinner with you, but since I got fired I have to save money.
I didn't realize you got fired! What happened?
I missed my sales quota three months in a row.
That sucks. Your boss should have offered you coaching instead of letting you go.
Now unemployment barely pays enough to cover my mortgage. I'm a month behind on my utilities.
Well, let me buy you dinner to cheer you up.
I went with Michael to Vegas this weekend.
Was that his 21st birthday gift from you?
Yes, I have been promising him this for years.
I'm very glad that you were able to take him.
Me too, we had a great time there.
Did anybody else go with you?
How was your time in Vegas?
It was amazing! We literally had the best time.
Did you do much gambling at all?
we did indeed! Didn't end up winning anything but we still had a good time.
Hey there! Just got back from a great trip to Vegas!
Wow! Did you go alone?
No, it was my brother's 21st birthday and that's where he wanted to go to celebrate!
Oh, I hope you both had fun!
We sure did! We both drank too much but we had a blast and even won a little money!
Great! You and I will have to go there one of these days!
So Ash decided she could just move my stuff wherever she wanted it to fit her stuff in my truck.
That is what happens when you get a girlfriend, man.
I guess so. I wish she would have asked me first.
I am sure it will be okay and she did not mean any harm by it.
Yeah, the stuff wasn't thrown around everywhere so I guess it isn't that bad.
Yeah man it's nothing to stress about.
none of my items were for sale at the store
what? that's not good
yeah, I took action earlier to get to the bottom of it.
I hope they put your stuff for sale soon.
yeah me too
I'm sure it'll work out
I went to the store to check up on my items.
Did you find why you aren't selling?
The items all seem overpriced in comparison to their neighbours now. Nothing was on sale.
Are you going to give a discount?
I'm still debating it in my head.
Just have a limited time sale offer to see what happens.
Hey sorry I'm lat I just got back from the store.
No worries what were you getting?
bought some flour and sugar to bake a cake.
I love cake!
I want to bake a cake today.
Oh nice! You got everything you need to make it?
Yeah I should do. Went to the shops earlier and bought flour and sugar as we were out.
Okay, let me know if you need any help at all.
I will do but think I'll be alright.
Nice, hopefully it comes out delicious.
I'm going to be baking a cake later.
Are you going to use a mix or do it from scratch?
I'll make it from scratch.
I've never made a cake from scratch.
It's easy.  All you need is flour and sugar and a few other ingredients.
Maybe you can show me one day.
I just got back from the store with all the ingredients for the cake if you want to help me bake it.
I sure can, I love baking stuff.
I guess we can start now because it is already late in the evening.
Sure, and what is the cake for?
I am taking it to work with me tomorrow for a birthday party.
Oh so we can't eat any of it? That's a bummer.
I bought the flour and sugar so we can make a birthday cake.
I'm excited. I've never baked a cake from scratch.
Well, your going to learn. It tastes better than store bought or mix.
My husband will love this effort for his birthday.
I wrote the recipe down for you to use in the future.
Thanks again for helping me pull this off.
I answered a question in class that no one else could get.
Wow! What was the question?
It was a question about Lincoln's early life.
You know a lot about history.
Yeah, I also read the whole history textbook already.
I got a chance to look brilliant today.
You don't get a chance like that very often.
The others in the class had trouble answering a question and I had a stab at it.
Did you come up with the right answer?
I missed it by a mile.
You missed your chance at brilliance.
I tried to answer the question in class, but also failed.
Let me have a stab at the question.
It's hard. Everyone before me couldn't answer it either.
Okay, I will give it my best guess.
What chemical element is Argentina named after?
Argentina is named after silver.
Do you even know why she's mad at me?
I might, but I think its important for you to reach out to her to ask.
I have tried and she doesn't respond to me!
You have to just give it some time, but she will come around.
I hope so because I would really like to fix the issue.
I know she does to, but just  give it some time.
I'm not feeling to great, I'm going to go lay down for a little bit
You don't look very well, would you like to go to the hospital?
No, I think I will be ok. I just feel a little bit dizzy
well, let me know if you need to go since I can give you a ride if you're feeling sick
I will. Thank you for offering though
Quinn had one of his episodes at the mall today.
Oh no. Was it a huge meltdown.
Yes. I had to hold his arms down at his side. At one point, he was swinging them wildly.
Oh wow. It sounds like you had a very stressful day.
I fee so bad for him when he gets out of control like that. It's like he can't help it.
He doesn't do it very often. Usually a drink a tea relaxes him a bit.
Quinn went crazy again last night.
He needs to start taking his medication again.
He came at Riley, and was just swinging wildly.
How did you guys get him to calm down?
I grabbed him by his waist and held his arms down.
I didn't have a choice.
What do you mean you didn't have a choice?  It was murder!
She was going to go to the police!
Well now you are on the run from the law!
I know, I thought robbing that house would be so easy!
I cannot believe you killed her!
I don't feel safe with this security.
What are you going to do about it?
I just bought a gun from the store.
Wow that's a big move.
Look at this gun I purchased at the sporting goods store.
Why'd you do that?
I'm worried about home security.
You should have gotten a home security system.
This is my security system.
I hope you know what you're doing.
Just so you know, I'm going to be keeping a gun in the house.
How did you get that?
I just bought it at the store.
Why do you think we need a gun in the house?
I've been worried about home security. I think it will make us safer.
Just don't mistake me for a burglar when I get some midnight snacks.
The situation in our country is going crazy! I'm afraid even in my own home.
I hear you but buying a gun?
A persons home is their castle right? I need to defend myself.
You don't even know how to shoot one do you?
I'm scheduled for a gun safety class ok?
Just be careful.
Too many things are happening in the neighbourhood.
These are hard times. Just be aware of what's going on around you.
I have a home security alarm but I don't trust it enough.
Have you considered buying a gun?
I did and I'm glad I have one now.
You should feel safe right now.
I studied so hard for that test and passed it with flying colours
hard work usually pays off in the end and you earned it
I hope my dad takes me to disneyland since I worked so hard
well, he said he would so I don't see why he wouldn't take you
Hey did you get your exam back yet?
No, not yet. Did you?
Yes! Guess how I did.
I bet you got an A!
Yup! All that studying definitely paid off. I'm so happy!
That's great! I wonder what I got.
I was finally able to find that card.
Where did you find it?
Someone was selling it on eBay.
Did it cost you a lot of money?
Actually the price was really good.
Well I'm glad to hear your collection is complete.
I am so excited that I found it after all this time searching!
What did you find?
I found an antique, it' a vintage watch, one of a kind.
Where did you find it?
I found it online after searching in antique shops for weeks.
That's wonderful Jesse! I would love to see it.
How was your Birthday drinks last night?
It was good but we ended up staying out later than I would have liked.
Oh really? How come?.
Well  was done drinkning but Skylar wanted to carry on
Well that is just classic Skylar.
It really is, but was still a good time nonethless.
Skylar and the guys took me out for 21st birthday last night!
Where did you guys end up going?
To a couple different bars, I was done drinking at 11, but Skylar dragged me along to another bar and then another.
You got free drinks! Sounds like a great birthday!
I have a major hangover.
Why did you drink so much then?
I went out with Skylar and she just would not let me go home she took me to bar after bar.
Well you know Skylar loves to party.
It was my birthday. I should have been able to make the choices about where we went.
Well now you know Skylar is bossy and likes to drink.
I surprised my family with a visit today.
Oh that's really nice of you!
Yes they were very happy I stopped by.
Did you have a nice catch-up with your family?
I did thanks, we had tea and biscuits togetehr.
Aww that sounds lovely.
I was the only one who went down to see them today.
I'm sure they were happy to have company.
Yeah, they seemed appreciative. They said it was kind of me to visit.
Most people don't want to, so I'm glad you did.
I was so happy to finally get Bailey's number that I literally skipped all the way home.
That's great.  I know you've been trying to get up the courage to ask her out.
Yeah, I was really nervous.  I felt like my emotions changed dramatically in just a few seconds.
Did she see you skipping?
I don't think so. I was inside the library when I got her number and I waited until I was out on the sidewalk before I started to skip.
Let me know how it goes when you call her.
I was finally able to get Baileys number.
Was it hard to accomplish?
It was! I had to work really hard.
What did you do after getting it.
Well I skipped jubilantly down the sidewalk.
I bet you were really excited at that moment.
I tell you, I buy way too much rubbish...and I return too much of it too.
Haha, don't we all? I practically live in the customer service line!
I bet! I spent more than 30 minutes looking for a pair of shoes to return because I impulsively bought the wrong size. I thought I could fit into them even though they were too small.
But they were really pretty, I bet! You had no choice but to buy!
Exactly! See, you get me. Anyway, I finally found them after that half an hour...and then I had to spend another half an hour waiting at the customer service line to return them!
Sounds like too much effort to me. I would've just sold them on Facebook Marketplace or something, hehe.
I'm racking up the frequent flyer miles.
I wish I had a job that allows me to travel so much.
I love my job especially since I just got promoted.
Congratulations, are you getting a pay raise?
Yes, a pay raise is coming my way as well.
I guess dinner is on you this weekend.
I have been really busy working as a consultant.
I've noticed you've been gone a lot more recently.
I do this work all around the world.
I hope your boss appreciates your effort.
He does! He just gave me a promotion.
That is wonderful news.
Like my girl's bike?
Yeah, the red and pink sparkly paint looks good on you.
I know, right! It is kind of nice not having that bar in the middle that is on men's bikes.
Austin, why are you riding a girl's bike?
I forgot mine at school so Jesse let me borrow hers for the day.
That was nice of her. You should fill up her tires before you give it back.
I had a great time with Jesse this weekend.
It was such a nice day. What did you do?
We went bike riding, but I didn't bring my bike so I had to use Jesse's other one .
It was lucky that she had another one or you would have had to walk.
Biking 10 miles is much easier than hiking.
I just made the varsity team.
Congratulations. I know you have been working hard.
Thank you. I'm really excited to start! It took me two years of hard training!
And now how many days a week will you train?
Every day, so even harder.
Well, that's dedication! I'm happy for you!
Guess who finally made the varsity team!
Congratulations! I know you love to play football.
All my hard work and training finally paid off!
How long did you train to prepare for try-outs this year?
Pretty much everyday for two years.
Wow long old time then! Well congratulations and good luck this season!
I am so happy, I finally made the varsity team!
On great, congrats!
Thanks, I've been wanting this for such a long time now, and finally all my hard work has paid back!
Yeah, you should feel really proud
Yes, I am enjoying this moment.
Two years and you finally made it! awesome!
I made a costly mistake today with my horse.
I saw the race. You were pushing it really hard and it tripped. How bad was the injury?
Pretty bad. Some broken bones. She'll be out for months.
That really sucks, Jan. You took a risk and it didn't pay off. Still, I feel bad for the horse more than anything.
Me too. I never should've pushed her that far. I put winning ahead of her health.
It sounds like you learned your lesson, though.
I finally helped Skylar agree to look for a new job.
How did you do that? I thought she was really stuck on not changing.
I showed her how much more she could make and do at a couple of new places.
So she was okay with leaving the old place?
I think she was just used to it there. But there was no money or future and now she wants more.
You must be very convincing. I hope she finally gets herself out there for a better spot.
I finally talked Skylar into getting a new job.
Oh good on you! How did you mange that?
I explained she could be earning more at other places that would be giving her nearly as much stress as her old job was
Oh she really wasn't happy at her old job was she. Why was she so reluctant to leave?
I think it was just the fear of starting over at a new place.
I understand that, but I'm glad you talked her into it, she'll be a lot happier at the new job now I reckon.
It was painful but worth it
the braces?
yeah, I hated my crooked teeth, it hurt to chew too
oh I didn't know it was that bad
it was, I don't care how long it takes as long as they are straight after
I think I see an improvement already
I didn't go to school today because I got braces off.
Ouch, did it hurt?
A little bit, but my mouth has been hurting a lot more before I got braces, it hurt to eat.
I'm glad the braces helped you to feel better.
They did thanks, it's nice to have straight teeth now
Very good, will you be at school tomorrow?
Check it out! I got my braces put on today!
I see that, they look great! Nice colour bands. How do they feel?
They hurt quite a bit but I think it'll all be worth it to have my teeth all aligned.
Definitely. They've been bothering you for months now.
Yeah, it's been hurting to chew for awhile. And I'm sick of my crooked teeth.
I'm glad you were able to get the braces. You'll be so happy with the results!
I signed up for the marathon today.
Wow, that takes a lot of guts! I didn't even know you were a runner.
I'm not. I only signed up because I wanted to challenge myself.
In that case, you've got your work cut out for you!
I know, and I only have three days to train for it.
I've been running a lot on the track at school.
Why did you start running?
I am training for the marathon that's happening next month.
Cool.  You entered that?  You will be running by my work.
Awesome.  Come out and cheer us on.
If I am not too busy. I'll definitely do that.
I am joining the marathon next month, care to join?
What are you doing that for?
I just need a new challenge in my life. But I need someone to go with me.
Sure! I love to join. I just wish I'm physically fit for it
We still have time to prepare. Care to jog with me tomorrow?
That will be great. We can start slow. I'll see you tomorrow.
I get annoyed. My Dad doesn't like to do anything with us. I ended up playing catch with Addison's Dad.
Hey, at least someone wanted to do something!
Yeah. Just wish my Dad would have more time for us.
I think it's because he's busy at work.
Yeah. I know that he's trying to make extra money to take us on vacation next year.
Oh, wow. See? It's not because he doesn't want to spend time with you. It's because he wants to do something for you guys.
I really like Addison's dad. I wish my father could be more like him.
Why? What does Addison's dad do that your dad doesn't?
He's always trying to do stuff with Addison. They go to ball games, movies, and he plays catch with him.
That's a great dad. Addison is lucky.
I know. My dad doesn't do anything with me or my brother. I've played catch with Addison and his dad. It's fun.
Addison, your dad is so cool. You are so lucky!
Why, doesn't your dad play catch with you too?
Not anymore, he's too busy working on the road. That's what he told me.
Aw sorry but dads have to work hard so they can buy you toys!
I know but I saw him from my school bus on the road. He was wearing an orange jumper and was carrying a trash picker. I waved but he did not notice me.
Those orange jumpers are cool. I may ask my dad for one.
I got to finally break in my new baseball glove playing catch yesterday.
Its a nice glove, who did you play with.
Addison and his dad, they were outside playing and called me over to join them.
That's really nice of them, Addison's dad is a really good player and he coaches the high school team
Yeah, I am glad he always lets me come over to play, I wish my dad wanted to play catch with me.
It sucks your dad never wants to do anything, at least you can go over to your neighbours to play.
I finally found the perfect dress
What colour?
Pink. I tried it on and bought it immediately
Perfect size?
Yes, I never found a dress so fitting
Great news cant wait to see it
I decided to buy the pink dress for prom tonight.
That dress looked the best on you I think.
You really think so? I kind of liked the blue one too.
Pink has always been your colour so I am glad you chose that one.
I am too, I just have to tell my boyfriend to get a pink tie now.
Good luck with him finding the right colour, my boyfriend may as well be colour blind.
I tried on the pink dress we saw last week. I bought it this morning.
That expensive dress?
It was on sale for 50% off. I'm glad we didn't get it last week.
Wow you got a good deal. Was there any more?
Just one more in your size.
I guess I'll have to go shopping tomorrow.
I wanted to get a new dress.
It is about time.
I picked out the pink one and after trying it on, I fell in love with it.
Did you buy it?
I bought it right away at the store and brought it home.
Please bring it out and show me.
Ash broke her foot and can't do all that she should at work.
So his work didn't get done?
No, I helped her out and did most of it.
That's nice of you.
Well she tried, but was having a very hard time.
At least she has a good work friend in you.
I had to pull double duty today.
Ash can't do a lot of things right?
It's gonna be a while until she's back to normal.
I wish they could give you double pay or something.
I know, hopefully I get something out of this from the company.
I'm sure they'll give you a cookie.
Did you hear that Ash has a broken foot?
No, I didn't. How is she getting along at work?
Pretty good, but she can't do certain tasks.
Because of the foot?
That's right. I helped her perform some of her duties.
That was very nice of you. I hope she gets you something nice to thank you.
Having to work Ash's tasks again
Oh really? How come?.
She broke her foot the other day.
Aww bless her, I hope she is ok.
I think she's still in a lot of pain at the moment.
I bet she is. Must have really hurt a lot when she broke it.
My family really likes Jesse.
Jesse is a cool guy.
Yeah, he has a warm heart.
It's hard being away from home as a exchange student.
It sure is but Jesse makes it look easy.
Did you ever miss your home?
Yeah I did, it's hard sometimes being so far.
I get that, I'm sorry. I bet it sucked.
I loved being with your family though! They made me feel right at home.
Aww, thanks I am glad to hear that!
I couldn't think of a better place to have been so far from home.
Sorry, I can't go for dinner tomorrow.
Why not?
I have to work late and I won't make it in time.
You're always working late now!  Such a bummer!
Yea, but it's worth it.  I get paid to work overtime and I'm saving up to buy a new house.
Ok, I understand.
I have so much money, and can buy almost what I want
oh that must be nice, you must have a lot of cool stuff like video games or statues
I do have a ton of games, just sucks that I have to work a lot
that does suck but I guess that is what you get for getting so much money
that is true I can not complain I have a roof over my head
yea, plus you can save a lot for later on in life
I'm sorry I missed your baby shower. I had to work.
You need to make time for your friends. I missed you!
I make good money, but I don't have time for anything but work.
You need some downtime. You are so stressed out all the time.
I know. I bought you a nice gift though.
Thanks for the crib, but I would rather see my best friend.
I'm finally making a decent amount of money now, I'm just so tired from working all the time.
You've been working so much recently, you need to take sometime for yourself!
Yeah I think you might be right, I do work a lot!
You really do, and I'm happy you're making good money, but you need a break from all the work!
I'm really happy with my income, but it's starting to wear on me.
What is?
My job. I have to work a lot of long hours to make this kind of money.
Hang in there, Kendall. Maybe they'll promote you soon and all your hard work will payoff with less hours but more responsibility.
I went to sit with this new kid Casey today at lunch and she's so nice.
Did you know her before?
No, she's new. She didn't have anyone to sit with so I did.
That's really nice of you. Maybe she'll become a new friend
I know she will. We had so much in common and talked all lunchtime.
That's so good.
I met that new girl, Casey, and I have to say she is really nice.
I saw we had a new student, but I haven't talked to her yet.
I felt bad she was all alone at lunch so I sat with her and turns out she is really cool.
I will have to sit with you guys tomorrow and get to know her.
That sounds good. I am sure you will love her.
I can't wait to meet her!
I met the new girl at lunch today, I saw she was sat by herself so I went over and introduced myself.
Aww that's good of you, what was she like?
She was really nice! We hit it off right away.
That's god to hear, do you think you'll become friends?
I hope so, she was very friendly and kind and we have a lot in common.
That's great! I will have to introduce myself when I see her.
When did you dye your hair Austin?
Yesterday, I thought blue would be cool.
I'm not so sure it suits you, maybe you should try a different colour.
Ugh, I guess I'll have to dye it again.
Trust me, you'll thank me later.
You usually have a better instinct about these things than I do.
What colour is your hair now Austin?
Orange do you like it?
It's much better than that ugly colour you had in it last time
Yeah I can't believe I dyed it that colour.
It's looking much better now.
Thank you!
I feel bad. I told Austin his hair was ugly, and now he dyed it.
Oh wow. What made you do that?
I don't even know. We were just talking about hair, and it just came out.
What colour did he dye it?
It's like a light brown colour. It looks nice, but I feel really bad.
Hopefully you learned your lesson for next time.
I made a business plan because Kendall told me we should start a business together.
I can see you two working on a business.
Kendall is so creative and I have a business mind.  I think it's a good match.
What are you guys starting?
We have a few ideas.  Most likely something ecommerce.
That's all the rage right now.
Kendall and I are going into business together.
Oh really? Do you know how you're going to start  a business?
Yes, I do. I wrote out a business plan and we will be meeting next week to go over it.
Oh that's very exciting, you'll be the next great business mind of our generation!
Haha I don’t know about that, I'll be happy if we turn a profit in the first year.
See how your meeting goes about the business plan and let me know what happens.
I had a meeting with Kendall last night to dicuss our business plan.
Oh cool! How did it go?.
It went really well thanks, I think we will work well together.
What is your overall business plan? .
Well, the town does need a bowling alley.  I made a business plan to open one here.
Awesome! I'd love it if there was a local bowling alley!
Kendall gave me a great idea.
what was it?
He suggested starting a business. I made a business plan to discuss with him.
That's a good way to make money.
I'm thought I had a cold but I think it may be something worse!
aww bless you, have been to the doctors yet?
Yes, Jan just took me to a doctor.
Did they give you any medicine to take or anything.
No they said to rest adnd rink plenty fo water.
I hope this cold doesn't eventually lead to me getting really sick
I had a bad cold last year and I had to stay home for a week
I've been to the doctors, Jan took me yesterday bu they didn't give me any medicine.
That's strange, but it can't be that bad if they didn't feel the need to provide you with medicine.
My parents tricked me to get down the tree. I was so high up.
How did they trick you down?
They told me we were going to play a game so I came down.
Did you guys play a game?
Yes, we did.
Then I don't think they tricked you. They offered you another option.
Yesterday I was mad cause mom wouldn't let me play Xbox.  So I went up the big tree and I would not come down.
Really?  Why did you come down?  Were you scared up in the tree?
I'm not scared of anything. But my mom and dad said we would play Xbox together if I come down.  So I got down to play my game.
That's good that you came down.  You can get hurt if you fall out of a tree.
I'm Superman. I can't be hurt. I want to play Xbox now.
Well go for it.
I tried so hard to please Casey.
I don't think she appreciates you.
She has never given me any credit on the things I have done for her.
I know how you feel.
I guess she doesn't care for me at all.
It's her loss.
I can never please Casey. No matter what I do.
I am telling you Casey isn't right for you. You do everything.
I walk her dog, clean her house, cook for her, fix her car.
She never thanks you nor ackowledges everything you do for her.
I'm thinking about calling it quits. I love her a lot though.
I know it's tough but she doesn't love you. It's time to move on.
Casey makes me feel so bad about myself.
Is she still not giving you credit for all the things you do
nope, and she is so quick to get on my case if I do the smallest things wrong
She is no good for you, you should get out of that relationship.
I think you might be right.
I just adopted the cutest kitten this afternoon!
That's so awesome! I would love to see the kitten sometimes
Yeah you can definitely visit soon. She's a big lap cat, so I think you'll love her
Lap cats are my favourite! Especially the fluffy ones
Well she's very fluffy too, so I think you'll really love her
I'm so excited! I'll be over tomorrow
I've been stuck in the house for months now.  I was feeling lonely so I adopted a little friendly kitten from the animal shelter.
I heard a lot of people are doing that.
My friend, Kelly, who went with me adopted a puppy.
I feel left out now.  Maybe I should go adopt an animal and give it a home.
There are so many animals there that need loving homes.
I'll go down there next weekend.
I brought home my new kitten last week.
Congrats! I love cats.
I thought it would help a little to have something to come home to because I was feeling lonely.
Oh too bad. Does it help.
So much! I didn't know cats were such good simple companions.
I'm so glad you found her. Send me pics when you get home.
I have been feeling so lonely and depressed lately. I have been trying to find something to lift my spirits.
I am sorry. I didn't know you were feeling that way.
I ended up adopting a kitten recently and it has really been lifting my mood.
That's great! Animals are so good for lifting the spirit.
They are and my new kitty is so cuddly and loving. It is nice having someone to snuggle when I am down.
I am going to have to stop by and see this little kitten. It sounds adorable.
I saw a horrible accident last week!
Oh wow really? What happened?
I was walking home when 2 cars collided roght in front of me! It made the loudest crashing sound.
Oh my god! Was anyone hurt.
Both drivers got out of their car and had a few cuts and bruises but no one was seriously injured.
Ok that's good to hear, at least no one was badly hurt.
I'm so sleepy sorry.
Did you work your second job today?
Yes, right after my day job, I just want a break.
Why don't you quit your second job?
I need the money.
I see, go get some rest and I will talk to you later.
I wish I could enjoy my life.
why can't you enjoy your life?
I have to work 2 jobs and it is so draining.
I do not believe that working will make you happy.
But I have to work two jobs to keep my family afloat. I feel exhausted all the time.
I'm really sorry you have to put yourself through this, your family are lucky to have you.
I can't take much more of this, you know?
Still holding down those two full-time jobs?
Yeah...70 to 80-hour workweeks are just draining me so hard.
I'd be exhausted all the time as well.
I really need to quit one of these jobs, but I need to pay the bills and my loans.
Yep, I've been there too. But at least you can relax a bit once your debt is under control!
It's really tiring getting water for the family.
Do you use a pump for water?
No, I have to walk all the way to the well.
Is the walk far?
Yeah, and I can only carry a jug at a time.
That does sound tough to get the water.
Aubrey is the greatest friend ever.
I thought that was me? Just kidding.
All of you are great friends to be honest. I'm very lucky to have you guys.
What did she do that was so awesome?
She's just super nice. I went and visited her relatives today whilst she was away, jst to make sure they are doing ok.
that is so lovely of you!
I saw your relatives when you were gone and gave them your present.
Thanks so much for doing that. How were they?
They still seem pretty sick.
Are they in relatively good spirits?
They seemed optimistic about a fast recovery.
I hope they do recover quickly. It's been a drag knowing they aren't well.
I was just carving some sugar.  I know I need to cut back on it but I drank a soda anyways.
You can drink sugar free.
This one wasn't sugar free.  I feel a bit guilty now.
Don't be hard on yourself.
My doctor tells me that I am borderline diabetic so I really need to watch my sugar intake.
What's done is done.
I know it's not good for me but I had a craving for soda.
As long as you do it in moderation it's all right.
I can't go back to the way I was before because it's not good for my blood sugar.
You need to be careful with that stuff as it can get out-of-control fast.
Trust me I have seen the horror stories.
OK then, make sure you keep that in mind.
I'm so annoyed. I blew my diet with too much sugar.
Uh-Oh. Hope you didn't go to the bakery.
No. I made a stupid move and drank soda.
Oh, man! You could have at least had a donut if you were gonna screw it up!
I know. I screwed up my diet over a soda! It's just as bad as the bakery, only less satisfying.
Yeah. And you could have just drank diet!
Austin, I thought you were going to give him that spot?
You brother would bring to much trouble to the church. I had to turn him away.
Isn't church where you go when you are lost?
He can't be trusted with the keys.
I apologize for my brother's laziness.
You don't have to apologize for him, he needs to improve.
But he's always creating mischief and getting into trouble.
That's his problem, not yours.
I need to talk to my parent's about this and get him help.
Maybe you should.
I had to stop Addison from hurting herself the other day.
What do you mean?
Sh was going to climb this old half broken ladder, so I pushed her away from it.
Did you really have to push her? Seems a bit over the top.
I didn't want to but she refused to listen to me.
We finally got our new budget done last night. It was a marathon session.
I hate anything to do with bills and finances. I just let Kendra take care of it.
I would let my wife take care of it but she doesn't like it either. So we discuss the whole thing together.
That's probably the best way to handle it.
Yes, especially since we had the baby. Seems like we're always broke.
I understand that completely. All the diapers, formulas - they all cost a fortune.
I'm gonna give the dog a bath.
I can't believe how dirty he got my towel.
I'm really sorry about that. I'll wash it after.
That would be great thanks.
Think you could help me wash him?
Sure no problem.
Hey can you help me clean up this dog?
Sure. What happened?
He rolled in the mud. Plus, he got Cameron's new beach towel dirty!
Well, it was going to get dirty anyways. Poor dog. Are you filthy buddy? Let's wash you up!
It took an hour to clean that dog.
That's why you need a leash.
I'll never put my dog on a leash!
Why? Its the law!
I don't want to torture my well behaved dog!
Your well behaved dog that rolls in mud?
My dog rolled around in the mud today.
Ugh that must have been a mess to clean up!
Yeah it was a huge pain!
How'd you clean him up?
I used Cameron's towel, it got all dirty!
Oh no, I hope you were able to wash it!!
The other day I let Jesse drive my new car.
Wow, you don't ever let anyone drive your car!
Yeah I was feeling pretty kind the other day and decided to let him try it out.
Did he love it?
Yes he said he wants to get a car just like mine now.
That's nice. I will have to keep that in mind when I go to look for a vehicle in a few months.
I let Jesse drive my car the other day.
Oh yeah? How did she like it?
She said she had a great time!
That's great.  Does she want a car like yours now.
I think so, she seemed very fond of it.
Well she is just going to have to save up and get her own.
Taylor is interested in designing.
You would be a valuable asset for him.
He is a total newbie and needs guidance.
I hope you were able to help.
With my help he could see other areas in which he could improve.
Thanks to you Taylor is off to a good start.
I think Taylor is going to do very well in the design field. He listens and picks up things quickly.
I'm so glad to hear that. I wasn't sure.
I'm not exaggerating. He's good and wants to get better. Loves criticism.
He used to hate criticism.
He told me he considers it a chance to fix what's wrong.
Ash, your abusive ex-husband just left here.
Jesus, what happened? I hope you didn't tell him where I was.
He threatened me. He has guns Ash. Get out of there.
I'm calling the cops. He'll kill me.
I already called. Just leave. The cops will meet him there.
I'm scared, really scared. He will hunt me down like an animal.
My boss got so mad at me at work today.
What did you do?
I ended up dropping a small stack of plates.
Dang! Did you say it was an accident?
I did, and I also apologized to him for breaking them.
I'm sure your boss isn't that mad at you, it was just an accident.
I finally found a good job!
But I thought you already had a job!
I do, but I hated working there and having been looking for a new job non-stop for months.
Does the new job have better hours, better pay?
Both, and management is pleasant and professional, which is a far cry from what I was used to.
I guess a big congratulations is in order!
Yes I finally landed a job!!!
Congrats! I didn't know you were looking for a job
I've been looking really hard for a few months now
I bet you're excited
I am so excited, and of course it's nice to pay bills
I'm glad you finally found one, sometimes that can be tough
I finally got a job!
Woo-hoo! It's been quite a while, yeah?
I've been looking for months and I've been as persistent and dedicated as humanly possible.
Nice to hear it's finally paid off!
I know, right? It feels cathartic, to be honest.
I'd feel relieved too. I'm happy for you!
I think one of the problems I'm having in Spanish class is I can't see the board.
That would be a big problem, definitely.
So I asked the teacher if I could move and now I'm going to be sitting near her in the front.
Good. I hope it makes a difference. You should not be getting a D in that class.
No way. And it's bringing down my whole grade point average.
I'm glad you took some steps to fix it. It's about time.
I moved up front during class today and felt a little uncomfortable.
Why?
I couldn't hear the instructor so I got up to move and then I got worried I'd disturb people.
But you moved up?
Yes, it was too late to change my mind. And it helped!
Then don't worry about it. I am sure no one minded.
Everyone seems to be a fan of the baby.
People go crazy for babies.
I'm trying to think of what it was that drew me to babies as I grew up.
For me it was the smell of the baby products.
That's true, some of those things smell amazing.
You know, babies are powerful creatures I need to stay clean and fresh.
I still can't believe I am a mom!
You are so lucky to have Chloe, she is an absolute doll!
I took her for a walk in the park yesterday and everyone wanted to see her in the stroller.
Did you get a chance to take her to work yet so everyone can see her?
We are going on Friday, but I already got messages from people who saw her pictures and they can't wait to meet her.
If you ever need a sitter you know I am available!
I had my first baby recently!
Oh wow it's so cute.
Glad it made such a impression on everyone, they can't get enough.
This is the prettiest baby.
Right!
Makes me so happy!
It has been ages since I talked to you!
What has been going on?
I had baby Chris and everyone just thinks he is the cutest baby ever!
Babies do make impressions on people, especially when they are cute as yours!
I think she really needs some groceries since her husband lost her job
those kids look like they lost a lot of weight over the summer
I would hate to see them not have anything to eat and go hungry
you're a really good person for helping them out and making sure they stay fed
I stopped by my neighbour's house with a bunch of groceries yesterday.
Oh, is she sick?
No, she seems healthy, but her kids are always starving! I caught one of them picking through my trash looking for food!
Did she get laid off? Maybe she needs help applying for food stamps?
Every time I ask if she needs any help, she insists everything's fine, but I just couldn't stand seeing those kids get thinner and thinner.
It's a good thing you brought them groceries. Maybe you should refer her to a social worker to see about getting permanent assistance.
I went over to my neighbour's today and gave her the groceries, just like I had been talking about doing.
It sounded like you were concerned that your neighbour's children weren't getting enough food.
Yeah, they don't have a lot of money and I couldn't deal with it anymore. So I stopped asking and just brought the food over myself.
I'm sure they appreciated the gesture.
I can't thank you enough for all you are doing to help me Jordan.
Hey I just really want you to win!
I know I do to!
If campaigning for you helps then campaigning is what I will continue to do!
Thank you I really am putting forth my best effort.
I know and that's exactly why I want you to win so badly.
So I heard you had lunch with my mom, how did it go.
It went great, I thanked her for all her support and we had a nice time.
I'm glad to hear that, she cares a lot for you, almost like another daughter.
And I also care a lot for her too.
Yeah, you have a great relationship and I am glad.
Thank you that means a lot.
Aubrey, I'm really going to miss you now that you're going back to Nebraska. It seems so far away!
I'm going to miss you guys so much, too! I really appreciate what your mom and the whole family did when I needed help.
It was nothing! You just needed a place to stay to finish up school. I'm so happy that we were able to help out.
I don't think I could have done it without you guys, especially your mom. I'm taking your mom out to that really nice new place downtown for lunch to thank her.
She's been talking about that place for months. I'm sure she'll appreciate it!
We're going to have a really nice lunch. It's just a very small token of my appreciation.
It was such a sunny day out that I ended up going for a walk in the Sun.
How did it feel?
It was a bit tiring after a while.
Yeah, exercise in the heat can be draining.
But at least I got a little exercise.
You should walk more even when it's not sunny.
I love when its nice and sunny.
Me too.
I walk anytime its pretty outside.
Yeah, nature is beautiful.
It's tough being an on-call nurse overnight these days.
Are you getting a lot more patients in?
The hospital is overflowing on this shift and there's only a few nurses.
That means that you guys are taxed.
Definitely because each person has a bunch of patients that they have to take care of.
It's an honourable job but very tough indeed.
It's been tough taking care of all these sick patients recently.
Are they in a lot of pain?
Yeah, I do my best to ease their pain with medicine.
Does it help them?.
Sometimes, but other times it doesn't seem to be enough.
It is a really tough job, you're doing your best.
I just got home from a 12 hour shift as a nurse at the local hospital. I'm pretty tired.
That's to be expected. 12 hour shifts are pretty taxing and you've been working pretty hard.
I've been working hard but I've also done a lot of good things. That's why I got into medicine.
That's the nature of the profession. We rely on medics to keep us in good health.
One of my patients today came in with some chronic nerve pain. I was able to mitigate it through some antibiotics.
Chronic nerve pain is something I hope I don't have to deal with. From what I've heard it can be really painful.
I'm glad my shift at the hospital is all over now.
Tough shift was it?
Yeah I had a patient come in with some very serious burns
Oh Bless them!
I managed to ease his pain thankfully but he'll need surgery.
I'm glad you were able to help, I hope they get better soon.
You know, the rental agreement looked so confusing to me.
I know. There's always so much stuff in those contracts.
Yup. I chose to look at it on a simpler level.
Right. But you've got to make sure to read all of it and understand it so you know what's in it!
I agree. I told the attorney to explain each paragraph in simple terms.
Oh, I get it! That's a great idea!
I went over the contract with that couple.
How did that go?
I cut out all the extra jargon and just tried to explain in simple talk, they would understand.
When you say it that way, it is something they can understand and makes the process go faster.
That contract was tough to read.
I know, I just skimmed over it and got confused.
I just hope that I didn't miss anything that will hurt me.
I think will be fine it was just a lot of technical talk.
Yeah, we've got this.
If not, we will find out tomorrow.
Jan couldn't find their back pack this morning!
The leather one?
Yes, that one.
But they have it now so you must have found it.
Yeah, I found it under the breakfast table.
Wow, Jan is always losing her stuff.
I found Jan's leather backpack in the hall today.
That backpack's nice. I am surprised no one stole it.
She said she left it near her desk but she looked everywhere and couldn't find it.
So you helped her look?
Yes and it was right outside the door.
You're a good friend. I know she loves that backpack.
Dinner was really nice but we were late getting there.
Were they upset?
They didn't seem to be.
That's good.
I just had to text my husband to let them know we were going to be late.
I'm glad it ended up being a good night.
I texted my husband today because he was supposed to be home two hours ago.  He was running late for dinner.
Were you guys going out to eat?
He had made a reservation at our favourite restaurant.
Did he make it home on time?
Barely.  I was mad at him but once we got there, I forgot all about it.
Sounds like you enjoyed your dinner.
Anna and I went to a bar last night.
You guys are getting very close.
Yes, I suppose you could call us lovers.
What did you do at the bar?
Just the usual bar stuff--drinking and talking.
Well, don't get to where you never go out with me.
I took Amanda, my girlfriend, to the bar by the campus for a few drinks and talk about life a bit.
Was it crowded?
Not too bad.  It was a Tuesday night.
Classes haven't started yet.
That too.  I just wanted to grab a few drinks with Amanda before school starts.
You are such a great match.
Let's go to the bar.
Yea, I'm down to chat a bit.
What do you want to talk about?
How about running.
I love fitness.
Basketball is my favorite.
I was getting pretty frustrated.
Were you working on something?
Yes and I couldn't find anyone to help.
Did anyone finally show up?
Yes, I was really relived when my friend volunteered to help with the work.
That was nice of him.
I'm so glad you were able to help with the community garden.
Yes, I love helping out the community and I do enjoy gardening myself.
Actually, we do this event every spring and summer, so glad you could join us.
It's great to come out on such a nice, sunny day.
Next week we are also helping at the soup kitchen if you have some time.
I'd love to join you and work at the kitchen!
I think I figured it out.
That's a good try Carson but you got one thing wrong. Can you guess what it is?
No. Delilah you were always so good at chemistry. Far better than I am.
I've had years of study Carson. So anyway you mistook the shadow of the compound substance for the substance itself which led to a disproportionate size.
Oh. Good catch Delilah.
Yes. I think that one fixup is all we need to get an A.
I have always loved the possibility of living the dream
What would you do with all your free time
I would for sure do some skydiving
Yeah I agree with that
You are so supportive of my decisions too.  Thanks for doing that
You're welcome
I think next week I would like to go skydiving with you
REally? You were always so adventurous as a kid
I think it carried over to me as an adult too
Maybe we can ask some more people if they want to go too
That's a great idea
I'll bring some of Lee's stuff.
What happened?
He got tonsilitis.
Oh wow that's insane.
Yea, he's in a lot of pain right now.
Oh I hope he'll be better soon.
I wasn't able to join you guys last night because I was helping out Lee.
What happened with Lee?
He was diagnosed with tonsilitis and had to stay in the hospital.
I hope they feel better.
Well I ended up bringing him a care bag with his walkman, a change of clothes, and some fruit drinks.
That was really nice of you Jordan.
They think I am such an amazing person. I shine like the sun to them.
The students?
Yes.  They have no idea though.
About what?  You seem pretty great to me.
I can be so petty sometimes.
Really, you've never been like that around me.
I'm normally a really cheerful person, but I have sides to my personality that I don't show everybody.
We all have secret sides to our personality, Sydney.
When I'm around people I'm always bright and shining, but deep down I'm kind of a petty person sometimes.
If that's something that bothers you about your yourself, maybe we can talk about it and help you work through it.
I have them all wrapped around my finger.
You have played your part very well my friend.
It has been hard to keep up pretences just to get the money.
You only have a few more weeks and it will be yours.
I can't even stand for that old man to be around me.
We will be together soon!
I'm super tired.
Because you were in the club last night, right?
How did you know I was in the club yesterday?
I also know what happened with the girl in the club yesterday.
Who told you? Were you spying on me?
Yes, I know everything. You're not as sneaky as you think you are.
Bailey was at the club last night.
So I am sure he knows what happened.
I’m gonna have to call him.
See what you can find out.
He says he knows everything about the girl in the club last night.
There you go.
I gave Riley directions
Was she lost?
No, but she needed to see the manager
Oh, did she find it alright?
After I pointed her in the right direction
That's good, hope she got what she needed.
I had to show Riley where the manager's office was.
Did she not know where it was?
I guess not.  It surprised me.
Yeah, she's been working there for months.
I guess she never paid attention.
I don't know how she is still working there.
I helped Riley yesterday so that she could deliver mail to our manager.
She is always trying to get on the manager's good side.
I know, but she looked so lost and helpless that I felt obligated to help.
I think Riley's just looking for a promotion.
That's probably true, as I saw her bringing coffee in this morning for the manager as well.
Well I hope it works for her, because I would hate to waste my money buying extra coffees every morning.
I am going to make a frozen pizza tonight if that is ok.
What kind is it?
It is pepperoni and sausage and it is pretty big.
That is fine, it is better than waiting on expensive take out food.
True, and this pizza brand is pretty good too.
Yeah I have had this before, the crust is very cheesy.
I'm baking a pizza for dinner.
Is it homemade or frozen?
Just a frozen pizza I had in my freezer.
So it's a lazy night tonight.
Yep, you want to stay for dinner and we can watch a movie afterwards?
I'd love to. I'm starving.
I think I'm going to get three cheeseburgers and fries
I might just get fries and a drink
Lets go place our order so we don't have to wait too long
I just have to fill mine out so I will meet you at the table in a minute
Okay,  I will be right over here then
Damn it's almost time.
Time for what man?
Essay time its due in  2 or 3 days so I gotta prep by reading an article.
Maybe you should read more than 1?
Probably.
I think I've done a lot of work to prepare for this essay.
How did you prepare for it?
I just finished reading an article to get ready for it.
You think that was enough work?
I hope it is. The essay is due in a few days.
Just don't ask me to help. I don't know how to write an essay.
I read an article to prepare for the upcoming essay
Yeah, I hoped you have prepared very well
I think so, I feel very ready for the essay
Good to hear that from you
Normally I wouldn't sell like this, but the situation is pretty dire.
Should I sell my shares too?
If you don't, you're going to lose all of your money.
Thanks for giving me the head's up! I'll sell too.
I'm telling you, you will lose your money if you don't sell now.
The company is taking a steep, I just feel bad for loosing money.
I know but it's better to lose some money than to lose it all.
I will take you and your advice and so will the others.
It’s the right thing to do.
I hope you are right.
There is so much to do as a new father
I bet
I had to take my toddler to school a lot and I think that they cry too much
Toddlers do cry a lot
I had just signed him up for school so that could be most definitely why
Yeah you are so right
Man I honestly broke down today taking Henry to school.
Well it's his first time going to a school.
I know, I just didn't think I would get so emotional.
I got extremely emotional with my first as well.
It's great to know that I am not alone. I mean I literally cried more than Henry.
I am not surprised about that, but don't worry. You will get over it.
I got evicted from my apartment when I couldn't pay rent on time.
You didn't try to borrow money from someone?
Most people I know are hurting.  They can't help me.
We are all going through hard times.  I expect there to be a lot evictions in the coming months.
My friends all have received notices.
Where are you going to sleep now?
I can't believe I got an eviction notice from the landlord
Why what did you do?
I refuse to pay rent on time, but I didn't think I would get evicted right away
It's your fault that you got kicked out. Why did you refuse to pay?
I was going to pay but I ran out of checks.
oWhat are you doing now?
I really scared my girlfriend the other day.
What did you do to her?
I told her a scary story.
Where did you get the scary story from?
I heard it a long time ago while I was at summer camp.
I love all the memories I had from summer camp. I remember all the scary stories too!
This is the story of the man with the hook hand!
Oh God...I hate hook hand guys and stories!
The crazy thing about this story is, it actually happened to a girl named Jill, who worked in the office, right back in accounting.  And then she disappeared and was never seen again...
You're lying.  Please say you're making this story up!
Nope.  I was here when it happened, and believe me, it was real!
Is this something like the story of the Candyman???
I just wanted you to know the truth before you see her again
I couldn't believe she would just lie about you like that
she is very deceptive and she only looks out for herself
I guess it all makes sense to me now why she acted like that
I'm just glad you believed me
Sydney is alright.
Why do you say that?
She didn't know how to dress professional for the job interview but she was cool enough to let me help her.
That's awesome. Did she get the job?
I know you have an interview today.
Yes, but I do not know how to look professional.
If you want I can help
That would be awesome.
Well how about if you take a formal dress and heels
That sounds perfect.
I just got put in charge of a big catering job.
Oh, cool. Maybe a promotion is in the works.
I really hope so.
How did you do?
It was nerve wracking but I was able to hand down orders as to what was going out next.
I'm glad it went well!
I am going to give Austin his big break.
That is very kind of you.
In my job as a newscaster I have influence over the producer.
What did you do for Austin?
Since Austin is a meteorologist I got him a gig and asked him to describe the weather.
A star is born.
I wanted to hear what the weather was gonna be like from Austin
Do you have plans this weekend?
I do and the weather needs to cooperate.
I heard that we might have some rain in the area.
That’s what I heard too that’s why I had to ask him.
What was his response?
I hope to never walk into that bar downtown.
Apart from the jocks that hang out around there, I think the place is quite fun.
No, I basically had one too many drinks and I hurt my ankle.
Did you hit your leg?
I crashed into a ditch.
Whoa! You definitely had a lot.
I have to let go of this fear of cats.
Here, pet Mr. Sprinkles, he will love it.
I don't know what if he bites me.
Mr. Sprinkles would never do that, come and see.
I guess I can give it a try.
See, he loves it.
I actually petted a cat today.
You did? Aren't you afraid of cats?
I am. But this girl I went on a date with had one and  I didn't want her to think I'm weird or so.
Lee, I don't think she would have thought it was strange that you were afraid of cats.
Men aren't supposed to be scared of much so I know cats would have been a deal-breaker.
I don't think so
I went over to Dave's last night.
I thought you didn't go there because of the cat.
I was scared to death, but I ended up petting him.
If you keep going over there, you may get over your fear of cats.
Maybe one day. So far I still don't like them.
I saw this cat the other day and I couldn't help but pet it, it was so cute!
I thought you had a phobia of cats?
I do.  This was the first time I ever saw a cat that I wasn't scared of.  I liked this cat.
That's great!  Maybe you're getting rid of that phobia, finally.
That would be cool.  I would like to try to have a cat, as long as it looked and acted just like this one.
Well, then, we'll have to search around and find you a cat that you can get along with!
I'm so scared of cats.
I'm not a big fan of them either  .
But I finally petted one.
Really
Yes, you couldn't do that, or?
No thanks, I like dogs more.
I designed formats to make notes.
To sell them or just as a hobby?
I will sell it to the companies for a lot of money.
You will make a lot for sure.
I will design even more then.
I can help you.
The test is in five minutes.
Have you read the novel?
I wasn't sure if I would meet the deadline.
Have you finished reading it?
I finished right on time.
Good.
There's nothing that tastes better than a bowl of Cocoa Pebbles and glass of orange juice in the morning.
Don't forget the toast and butter! Those are good too.
Maybe for you, but I like my cereal. Toast is just burnt bread.
Do you mind if I have myself a glass of Orange Juice with you, Ash?
No, help yourself. But don't touch my Cocoa Pebbles. Those are all mine. Eat your burnt bread.
No problems here. Toast and OJ are my favorites.
I poured this bowl of cereal but I don't really want it.
Well why did you pour it?
You know my mom won't let me out in the morning without eating.
Well do you want an egg or a bagel instead of cereal?
Now, we don't even have any eggs.
I can get you either from my house if you don't want the cereal.
Did you make it outside today?
No, I was working all day.
It was such a beautiful day, I brought the dog out for a long walk.
Where did you guys go?
We went to the park and over by the water.
Sounds like a perfect day.
I took my little baby for a walk today. She loved being outside.
Did you have a leash on her?
Yes, but I carried her most of the time because I like it.
Did she get to walk at all?
Yes, it was a beautiful day so I took her to the park. She ran around there.
I enjoy going to this church.
You've been a great help to everyone with all of your volunteering.
I would like to read to you the Lord's word and I hope the pastor will like it.
I'm sure he will love it. It's beautiful and a timely message for the congregation.
Thank you! I really was looking for a passage that will put people's minds at ease through all of the chaos.
It's perfect. I'll go talk to the pastor about it.
The Lord is good.
Yeah, all the time
I loved reading the Lord's word in church.
Yeah, I've noticed
My pastor loved it.
I think so, he told you've been a great asset to the church.
The pastor said I've be a great asset to the church.
Wow! What did you do to make him say that?
I've been reading the Lord's word.
You're very inspirational. I should stop by one Sunday.
You're always welcome to join me.
I just can't stand living with Sasha any more.
You mean your mother? What happened now?
She is forcing me to stay in tap class. I hate tap class. I don't want to dance anymore. But she refuses to let me decide on my own.
That sucks. Have you tried to talk to her about it?
Countless times. And it always turns into a fight. I just can't understand her.
Maybe it is time to go visit your dad for a while.
I spent last night in jail. I got pulled over for running a stop sign, and the cops realized I had been drinking and driving.
Driving drunk is so dangerous and stupid. You could have killed someone.
I know. And believe me, the cops didn't have any sympathy. They weren't about to cut me a break.
This is a harsh thing to say, but it's good that you got caught. Maybe it's a wakeup call.
I have to agree with you. I'll never drink and drive again. Spending the night in jail was horrible.
I bet it was. You've got lots of friends. You can always find a designated driver.
I can't believe I had to spend the night in jail!
What happened?
I was driving drunk and when the cops caught me they had no sympathy.
Well, those are some of the consequences of driving drunk.
Yup, I sure learned my lesson. I will never do it again.
I'm glad you learned a valuable lesson from all this.
You know how shy I am.
You are a wallflower.
I recently moved from the country into a big city where I do not know anyone.
You are going to have to change.
I am nervous about meeting people.
You had better decide now if you want to go it alone or join the world.
I got everything moved into my apartment today.
How does it feel to live an apartment and not a house.
Its small, but I like it a lot already.  I met my neighbor, he's been here for decades.
Wow, that's a long time, did you meet anyone else?
Not yet, I am really nervous about starting my job and meeting lots of new people.
Don't be, you're a funny guy and people are gonna like you, just give them a chance.
I hope I can meet some nice people here because I have been so bored lately
Would you like to go to the football game later?
I would love to go with you. Will mike be there?
We can call him and ask him if he wants to go
That would be amazing and I can't wait to go
I think I did a great job playing the saxophone today
I'm not so sure about that because it sounded kind of bad
Maybe I need to practice a bit more before I play again
I think that would probably be a good idea
Yesterday at my new music class, I was humiliated in front of the entire class!
What happened? It couldn't have been that bad because it was your very first class.
Exactly, it was the first class for most of my classmates too but nearly everyone had at least some experience playing their musical instruments but me. When the instructor asked me to play my saxophone to get an idea of how much I could play all I did was blow air into it making an awful sound because I had never even tried to play the saxophone before.
Oh, that is terrible, but there is always a bright side. After you're done with the lessons, you will be able to look back and see just how far you have come and how much the lessons have helped.
I guess you're right, but first I need to work up the courage to go back into that class and play my saxophone again.
You should practice at home alone before your next class to build up your confidence. That should help you walk into the next class with a little more confidence.
I played the saxophone for the first time tonight.
How'd it go? Did everyone enjoy it?
My inexperience showed in front of everyone. It was slightly embarrassing.
You're new to it. You'll get better.
Thanks!
Tracy asked me to lead our group story next week.  I feel so honored.
What group is it?
I am in this book club where we read a book every week and then come together and discuss it.
That sounds time consuming.
It could be tough to get through a book a week, especially if it's a thick book.  It keeps my mind sharp so I like the group.
You are always such a bookworm.
Hey! Tracy is letting me lead the group story next week.
Congratulations. What are you going to talk about?
I'm not sure yet but I'm so excited.
Well, I can help you figure it out.
Should I tell a horror, comedy or drama story?
How about a drama story? I was planning on doing a horror story next month.
You remember the time we got arrested.
Not something you forget.
Anyway, I told the kids about it to scare them.
Why did you do that?
They were really misbehaving.
So you threatened them with the cops?
My kids have certainly been better behaved since the arrest incident.
What arrest incident are you talking about?
Oh, last month I had my friend, who is a policeman, pretend to arrest my household for being too noisy. He took us in the squad car down to the police station and everything.
Wow that is really bold!
Yeah. But it worked. They've been good and quiet ever since!
You'd better hope they won't ever find out!
The kids were being horrible the other night, so I told them about the time I got arrested.
I didn't know you'd been arrested.  What was it for?
Oh, a friend and I  borrowed a scooter without permission when I was 15.  We got caught and I had to go to the police station.  Since I was a juvenile and didn't have a record, I didn't get in too much trouble.
I suppose that made an impression on you.
Well, let's just say I never borrowed anything without permission after that.  I think I scared the kids when I told them about it.
Hopefully you did and they won't repeat your mistake.
I always tell my kids to behave properly.
That’s good. Kids really learn from us adults.
I told him about the time I got arrested.
I never knew that.
I thought that by telling them, they would behave.
Let's hope it works.
Had a close call with the TV on movie night last night.
A close call? What do you mean, what happened?
I don't know, I just couldn't get the darn thing to power on. It just seemed dead.
What terrible timing! How did you fix it?
I just kept trying and eventually it came to life. I don't know what the problem was.
Weird. Well, at least it fixed itself and didn't ruin your movie night.
Oh know the tv isn't working!
How are we going to watch the movie then?
Hold on.  Let me try something.
Ah yes, the cord is in the wrong spot.  Move it over there.
Yes!  Got it!  Movie night is still on!
Yay!  Let's get this party started!
I feel I accomplished something today.
Well that makes one of us. Why, though?
Remember that application? It was due today and I just made the deadline.
That's great! Did you have to mail it in?
No, I just gave it to Taylor and he filed it for me.
Oh, that was nice of him.
I finally turned in my application for the job I want to my boss Taylor today.
That is good, do you think you will get the job?
I hope so, I have been wanting this promotion for over a year now.
You definitely deserve it because you have been working at your job the longest of anyone there.
I've done all I can at this point. I really need the increase in pay.
If they don't promote you then they don't deserve you.
I completed the application and handed it in.
Who did you give it to?
I gave it to Taylor.
Oh, that's good. Taylor will make sure it gets to the right place.
The driver was going 90 miles per hour.
Was it hard to catch up to them?
It was hard. I wrote them a ticket, and they still gave me the impression they think I was the bad guy.
They were going 30 over the limit, though.
Yeah, and they sped up even after I tried pulling them over.
They are lucky they only got a ticket.
I was passed by a driver going 100 miles per hour.
Did you catch the speeder?
I chased after him, flashed my lights and he pulled off the road.
Did he give you an excuse for his speeding?
He was not sorry in the least bit so I wrote him a huge ticket.
That served him right.
Hey this car is going way too fast. I better pull them over.
What seems to be the problem officer?
Maam, are you aware that you are going 80 in a 20 mile per hour zone.
Oh My God! I'm so sorry. I'm late for work.
That's no excuse. I'm going to have to write you a ticket.
Is that really necessary?
I've dreamt of this day since I was little.
I am so excited for you. You've studied so very hard to make it happen.
My dream is finally coming true. I will be going to space.
Aren't you just a little scared to go?
I am more excited to be an astronaut than scared.
I am so happy for you.
My mom has always said dream big and maybe your dreams will come true one day.  Today is the day.
What's your dream come true?
I got hired at the top aerospace research lab. I  am going to become an astronaut.
Will you be training to go to space?
That's been my dream since I watched the rocket launch on TV.
Just a child sitting in her living room, and now you are here.
I'm so excited. This has been my dream since I was young.
I know it has! You should be so proud of yourself.
I really am. I can't believe I'm in the NASA training program now!
It is such an achievement. I wonder how long it'll be until you're in space.
It'll take years and years, I'm sure. I can't wait to get started.
Neither can I. And I hope you know I'll want to hear every single detail!
I cant believe I landed my dream job
you worked so hard getting here you really deserve it
I appreciate you saying that and it feels amazing that I get to do what I love to do
Just keep up the hard work and I am sure you will get far in life
I'm trying to include Addison more, but he just brought a bunch of stuff with him.
Is he sick or something?
No he just has asthma and gets nervous easily.
He didn't seem nervous the other night.
He was nervous before we got to the party, but after a while he started to calm down.
I never noticed before.
Addison came along with me because I had invited him.  He was stressed because he had so much to do.
Where did you guys go?
We took a little trip up north for my friend's birthday.
Did you drive?
Addison drove his new car.  It's a sweet ride.
You guys took the scenic route?
I'm bringing Addison.
Well that puts me in a bind.
How so?
I just like things a certain way.
That's fair, I can ask Addison to not come?
It's okay this time, but let's aim to have an us day.
Well, the bank officially owns me now.
What happened?
You know how we wanted to renovate our home?
Yeah, you've been talking about it for a while.
We tried for a traditional loan, but they turned us down.  They did let us get a secured loan but we had to put up the house as collateral.
I guess that is one way of making sure you make your payments.  At least you get to fix up the house the way you wanted it.
The bank would not give us a normal loan so I had to use our house to get it for the boat.
Will you be able to pay it off?
Absolutely, we have been saving up for this for a long time.
The bank will be ruthless when it comes to getting their money.
I know, it is not like we just randomly decided to get a boat though.
I can't wait to go out on the boat with you once you get it.
I ended up finding a cheap phone that I could get for Carson when I was at the store.
That was a good idea! Did you give it to him yet?
Not yet but I will the next time I see him.
Didn't you say he's been sharing a phone with his wife?
Yes, it's very hard to get in touch with him sometimes.
I'm sure he'll be very appreciative of the gesture.
You really need a  phone, Carson.
I can't afford one.
But, I really want to be able to talk to you at all times.
Me too, but what can you do.
We're at the store, and I'm going to buy a phone for you.
Really?
Do you ever just stare at the mirror and look at yourself?
Okay weird, what type of question is that?
It's a real one! I was getting ready for work this morning and I just found myself starring into my own eyes.
That sounds kind of creepy and like you belong in an institution.
I was just trying to admire my own facial features.
Again, weird, be quiet!
I took my mom to the grocery store today. The grocery cart was so crappy, it almost tipped over and the groceries fell out.
Oh no! I know it's not funny but it is. I can see your face right about then. Did you talk to the manager?
You bet I did! He was really nice and apologetic. He gave my mom a $25 gift certificate for her trouble. She was happy.
That was a nice gesture. He didn't have to do that.
No, he didn't. I just hope he makes his maintenance staff take better care of the carts.
I wish Taylor wouldn't come to work when he's sick. It's very inconsiderate.
He's worried about his job. That's why he wont take any time off.
Well, he wouldn't stop sneezing and he ended up giving his cold to my son.
Uh oh. I guess it was a bad time for Take Your Kid To Work Day.
Sure was. My whole family ended up getting sick.
That sucks, but I'm sure Taylor didn't intend for it to happen.
I cant believe you got my son sick
I'm sorry but I didn't even know I had a cold when I came over
Do you think you can get us some cold medicine since I'm broke
Sure, it is the least I can do for your family
Thank you so much I really appreciate it
I have a bone to pick with you Taylor!
Uh oh, what did I do?
You gave my son a cold, and now the rest of us is sick too.
How do you know it was me? I haven't been sick!
Yes you were. I heard you sniffling when you were over at the house the other night.
I wasn't sick. I just have allergies. He must have picked it up from someone else.
You should have never have came around while you were sick Taylor.
Its not like I sneezed in your face or anything.
No but you had a cold and you were very sick.
I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to make everyone sick.
I think Taylor gave me his cold and now my whole family is coughing.
He was sick?
Yeah, and he came over for dinner and we hung around playing games.
How are you feeling?
I'm okay but definitely worn out.
Get rest! And get well.
I still can't believe that somebody scratched my brand new car and didn't even leave a number!
I know that you love your car, but you still can't act like that in public.
I can't help it, I was really angry!
You have a right to be angry, but throwing a fit in the middle of the street is not going to help anything.
I still can't believe someone called the police on me just because I was yelling and cursing a few times.
I hope that you realize now you need to find better ways to deal with your anger.
This is unbelievable.
Why are you talking in the middle of the street. What happened?
My car get scratched.
Oh that sucks.
I can't believe somebody scratched my car!
It's going to be OK, it is just a scratch.
Yea but it is going to cost me a lot of money!
Perhaps your insurance will pay for it.
They won't because I didn't see who scratched it or get their information.
Yea but depending on your insurance it might cover it anyway.
I'm the only co-worker here I guess.
Yea, nobody from the office came.
I got a present.
That is so nice of you.
Yea, here.
Thanks they're going to love it.
I really think my son will like the new transformers that I got him
I'm sure he will because he loves that movie
Yea, he has been talking about it all week and won't stop
I bet he will be really surprised when he opens it up and sees it
Oh I bet he will
I hope he enjoys the present! I am kinda sad no one else brought a present.
I think people didn't really realize it was that kind of birthday party.
Oh did people think it was like a BBQ situation?
I think so... I still wish I had brought a gift though. I feel bad.
It's ok, I'm sure he is just happy to have everyone here.
I hope so! I will make sure to get a gift next time.
I didn't realize the invitation had stated that gifts were not expected.
Did anyone else end up bringing one?
No, I was the only one who showed up with a gift for their son.
Oh well. It is still a nice gesture, right?
I guess you are right but I felt a little silly for doing it.
There's no harm in a kind gesture.
This gift is for Tommy.
You brought a present for the boss's son?
Well, of course. It is a birthday party.
But the invitations said no gifts.
I would feel weird if I showed up to a kid's birthday party without a gift.
Now everyone else is going to look bad.
Ok, guys, it's that time of year again where we all get to sit down together and lay down the pro's and con's of what we want for this years family vacation!
I guess I kinda need to get out of here so you guys can get down to business, then!
Oh, no!  Haha, we're taking you this year, Shiela, cause we're gonna need some extra help with these wild kids!
OMG, really!  Well then my vote is anything to do with Star Wars or either Terminator!
That's already 2 votes for star wars, and one for lego land!
How about Star Wars Adventures and Lego Land!  Those two attractions go hand in hand, what do you think about it?
I called a family meeting today to discuss our vacation to the Grand Canyon.
That's great did you guys get everything figured out?
Not really. We ended up waiting for two hours for some people to show up and then others had to leave. I think am going to cancel the trip.
Don't do that. I know you really wanted to go on that trip.
I did. But what's the point if no one else is interested?
Well your family can still go even if your extended family doesn't make it.
We finally had a family meeting about summer vacation.
What did you guys decide? Disney?
Not with this pandemic. We will go camping at the lake. It's safer.
The lake is beautiful. I am sure the kids will love it.
As if we need to spend any more time together after the quarantine.
Well, a change of scenery is always a good thing.
I am so full I'm about to burst!
Me too. It's so easy to overeat on thanksgiving.
Well, I'm going to put this turkey in the fridge, then.
That's a good idea.  I have a feeling we're going to be eating turkey for the next couple weeks, though.
Oh this turkey was really delicious!
Was it? why didn't you keep eating, there is still plenty of it.
I already ate too much, I love turkey and I was hungry.
hahaha you should take another bite at least!
I just put my turkey away because I truly can't eat anymore
Ok, ok...... I see that you already ate a lot
I give great manicures.
You always serve people.
What are you saying!
Let me treat you and give you one.
You are too kind.
Anytime friend I'm here.
I feel a little guilty about popping Aubrey in the head.
You should, considering the fact that you could be charged with assault!
But she provoked me. I was just angry at her for speaking badly about me.
That's not a good reason.
Do you think she'll press charges?
She might, so you should apologize to her.
I punched Aubrey the other day.
You should never hit someone that much smaller than you.
But she was badmouthing behind my back.
Aubrey is still a child.
I am still a child, too.
You are sixteen. Aubrey is only thirteen.
I can't believe she would do this to me.  We have been married for 5 years.
I couldn't believe it either, but I promise you that she is having an affair with her boss at work.
So now I know why she works all of those late hours.
She is doing a lot more than just working when she stays late.
Tell me more.
She told me that she has been seeing him for almost 6 months now.
Wow Jordan, I am in utter shock. I am so glad you told me but its too much.
I know. I was really pissed off. I thought we were all cool.
But I can deal with cheating with a man but her secretary.
Yup, makes me mad. These women just don't love men anymore.
Well, I have to admit she does have a hot secretary. Actually, if I imagine it, its not so bad.
Really Robin? What are you planning on doing?
Skylar made me so late for that meeting with the board members today.
What did she do?
First she was just insisting I answer he questions but then she actually stood in front of me in the hall.
So you couldn't even walk past to get to the meeting?
Right. I finally told her to get out of the way and got to the meeting late.
I hope you explain to her that she can't badger you like that at work.
I was the last one to the meeting today everyone was waiting for me.
Why were you late?
Skyler stopped me and asked a bunch of questions that didn't need to be asked and just would not let me leave.
Do you think it was on purpose?
It had to be. We're both up for promotion but she's not on this project so she didn't have to go to the meeting.
Wow, corporate sabotage.
A co-worker challenged me to a race today.
Really? Like on Seinfeld?
That's funny. Not quite. Just to the park two blocks away.
Who won the race?
I did. I got there first. I told them I run marathons.
I wonder what made them think they could beat you yet?
Did you hear? I won the race today!
What race? I didn't even know you were running one.
I got challenged to a marathon all the way to the city park.
Oh, congratulations on winning! Who was it against?
Robert from my office wanted to have a friendly competition.
Oh, that's fun. I wish I had come to watch you.
I knew I would win the race.
It was close though, you have to admit that.
You almost had me, I have to agree with you.
It was exiting, I will challenge you again.
I will be waiting for that challenge then.
Soon my friend soon.
Sorry I have to leave now. I've been having so much fun but I need to be home at 9.
Man that stinks. This was fun, though, we should do it again.
For sure. Are you coming to Joe's next week?
We'll see, we'll see. I have to check on some things, and I'll let you know.
Great, sounds good. See ya!
Hey can you tell me what time it is? My phone died
Yeah its just about eight thirty
Oh no its that late, I have to leave now
The party is just getting started
I know but our sitter could only stay til nine
Oh bummer, sorry you have to leave
There was a lot of nonsense going on at the party
I know, Thankfully that person had a babysitter too
That's so true.  The sitter had to go home by 9pm though
Oh they did?  That is a true shame
Yes it really is and I know the children are so sad
Yes, but I think they will be overall just fine
I'm tired today. I had to pull an all nighter last night.
Was something due today?
Yeah, I had an exam and hadn't studied for it at all.
Oh wow. Did you actually learn anything overnight?
I think enough to pass but I don't think I'll get an A.
I bet you learned this time though and won't do that again.
I am absolutely exhausted!
Are you not sleeping well at night?
Well I forgot I had a test coming up and I hadn't studied so I had exactly one night to study all the chapters!
Oh no, been there, done that, I hope you did well on the test
I feel I did, I mean I studied for eight hours last night
Wow well at least you can say you did the best you could! Get some rest.
I forgot to study for the English exam because I had others to worry about so I stayed up all night.
How did you forget about that test?
I had 3 other tests on the same day, all for classes that are harder.
Well I hope you managed to do well anyway.
I think I did, it is only English after all.
I think I did well too, but not as good as you.
I can't believe that I didn't study for the test.
Oh no! Did you eventually study at the last minute?
Yes, I did, but it was not fun.
Oh no! Was that an all nighter sort of deal?
Unfortunately, it was. I was not pleased with it.
Wow, well I hope you prepared yourself well for it.
I was up all night studying. I'm so exhausted.
You didn't sleep at all? Are you serious?
I didn't have a choice. Had a big test this morning and I wasn't prepared.
How do you think you did? Did you get enough studying done?
I think so. I hope so, at lea. We'll see.
In the meantime, you should go home and go straight to bed.
This month I been eating Italian food.
What pasta and meat balls?
All kind of Italian food.
Wow you have gained weight!!!
I am weighting 400 pounds.
You should go to the gym.
I need to stop eating Italian food.
Why? Italian food is amazing.
I gained so much weight. I'm 400 pounds now.
Let's eat more salads and we can go for a walk later.
I need to lose weight, I am 400 pounds because of all the Italian food I've eaten.
How long have you been like this?
I used to be around 220 pounds but I got depressed a couple years ago and started eating Italian every day.
Do you think you want to start losing weight soon?
I do but I don't have the motivation to do it.
I can help you, I go to the gym every other day and I am on the keto diet as well.
I've been feeling depressed lately.
What's the matter?
I weigh nearly 400 pounds.
How did you get to this point?
I ate Italian food almost everyday.
Hopefully things will work out for you.
I really need to start watching my weight
I see you have gained a few pounds
Mom has been here for months so all I have been eating is her fantastic Italian food every day!
Oh boy, all that pasta can be dangerous to your waistline
Tell me about it, I weigh nearly 400 pounds now!
We should go to the gym together!
It's still hard for me to sleep at night...I keep having the same nightmare every night....
You went through something terrible.  I can't imagine how terrifying that must have been for you.
It was so awful...In my nightmare, things happen just like they did in real life, except in the dream, when I'm trying to get over the fence my pants leg get hung up on the barbed wire and I can't get loose...
Then what happens?  Are you able to get away finally?
No.  I just hang there until the one main guy who grabbed me reaches up and grabs me and snatches me back down and the wire cuts my legs really deep, then they shove me in the back of the van and drive off with me.
Wow, Cameron.  That's so horrible and scary.  Your uncle was such a creep and I'm glad the SWAT team blew his brains out!
I am so happy to be home.
I am glad you survived that situation.
If I had not have climbed the fence to escape the kidnappers, I would not be here.
We were praying for your safety.
Thank you so much.
You're going to be impressed by my cooking skills.
What are you preparing?
I am cooking fish.
And what about that is so special?
I have developed my own blend of spices to add to the dish.
O.K., I'm hungry, so bring it on.
Last night was the perfect night to showcase my cooking abilities! Bill's parents came for dinner.
Oh perfect! What did you prepare for them?
I cooked a swordfish in the kitchen right in front of everyone!
Wow that sounds awesome, I wish I could have seen that!
It was beautiful and so delicious, they enjoyed it and even asked if I could cook that at the wedding next month!
See all those classes were worth it, the in-laws were impressed! SCORE
I'm such a good cook, check out this fish I made
Nice, it smells delicious
I know, only the best cooks have the skill to make fish smell good
I'm impressed, where did you learn how to cook so well?
I taught myself watching videos online
I would have guessed you went to culinary school, you're that good
I decided to show off my cooking skills today. I love to cook!
Oh really? What did you make to show off your cooking skills?
I made fish. It was really good!
I love fish! What kind of fish did you make?
Tilapia. I seasoned it and broiled it.
That sounds really good! You will have to make some for me next time!
So you're my real dad. Wow, that is crazy.
Yup, I was such a jackass when I was young. Made mistakes.
Well, my stepdad is your age and he's still a jackass.
I hope he treated you well. I feel horrible about not being there.
He does but sometimes he can be mean.
I'll be here for you now .
I've always wanted to meet you, but I never thought the day would come
It's so amazing to finally meet you. I wish I could have done it years ago
Why didn't you?
I was a bad person back then, but I've changed and feel like you are safe around me now.
Well I'm glad you changed
I'm sorry it took me so long to do that.
That man over there has a lack of righteousness.
Why do you think that?
Because I saw him yelling at a large group of people.
Why was he yelling at them?
There was no reason. He was just mean.
People like that are really the worst kind of people.
Mister settle down. You're not these people's leader or boss to tell them what to do.
You will not talk to my spiritual mentor that way. He has seen the future!!
Really. Can he give me tomorrow's lottery numbers? What kind of crap are you falling for?
He speaks the truth and people do not want to listen!! They will regret not listening.
But maybe he should change his approach. Yelling at people makes you look crazy!!
I disagree!
I am glad I took your advice about my new outfit.
Yes, girl.. I know how to dress someone
I want to go shopping with you more often.  How do you like your job?
I love my job as a fashion designer.  Would you like to put together more outfits?
Yes of course.
What's up with my dressing?
Wow, it's amazing, not like the dress you wore the other day.
Yeah, I have horrible taste in clothing.
This is perfect.
I took Taylor's advice.
Hm, that's good tho, keep it up.
Taylor took me shopping today.
Taylor paid for the clothes?
No I paid for the clothes, but Taylor chose the clothes because I never choose the right thing.
Oh I see. So what all did you get?
Taylor picked out five outfits, and I got to say they all look really good on me.
I'm happy to hear you were able to find some clothes that you liked and look good in.
I always knew I had terrible taste in picking my own clothing, so I got my friend Taylor to help me.
Why did you choose someone else to help?
Taylor is a fashion designer, and she always looks so perfect!
Really?  Maybe I should consider hiring Taylor to help me, also.
You really should.  Your outfits are totally hideous, honestly.
Ok, I'll give Taylor a chance.  I don't want to look like a homeless person.
I cant believe I did that.
Did what?
Ran into the woods full speed during the middle of the night letting god take the hands of the wheels.
Wow, that sounds liberating.
I survived!
What, you survived a night out at the cabin?  What's the big deal?
What's the big deal?  Didn't you hear about the escaped murderer on the loose in our area?  The one with the steel hook where his right hand used to be?
Did Peter tell that old campfire story last night?
Story?  It's all true!   He told us about how the murderer is still on the loose, and might be in the area.  Then, I saw the hook on the car door!  It freaked me out!  When I saw it, I just turned and ran like a lunatic until I got to the highway, and then I flagged down a truck to give me a ride home!  You know something about this?
I guess you could say so. Peter borrowed the hook from my dad last Friday.  He said he was gonna play the best prank ever.  I guess you are the one who got pranked!
I have always loved the cool night air so I ran through the woods last night.
Were you frightened in the woods by yourself?
In the past I've been frightened but I wasn't last night.
I could never throw fate to the winds and run in the woods like that.
I just felt so free last night
I'll have to try that one night.
I decided to run into the haunted woods and I came out without anything happening.
Was there a full moon?
No there wasn't
If you want to run into something spooky they say there needs to be a full moon.
Well tomorrow night you can come with me and I'll run again.
No way man, I am not getting attacked by some creepy ghost or demon.
Want to know how stupid I really am?
It won't take much to convince me but tell me, how stupid are you?
I threw fate to the winds and ran full speed through the thick woods in the middle of the night.
Did you run into any trees?
At least four.
You've convinced me you are stupid.
Kai is my landlord.
Are you living with him or living in one of his apartment buildings?
He is renting me an apartment.
How is that working out?
He wouldn't give me a key without a deposit but I just took the key in Kai's hands.
You had better be ready for an eviction notice.
I just bought a sick new jacket from Louis Vuitton.
Where'd you get the money to buy it?
I just took the money from a rich Aunt that I have.
Does she know about that?
I just bought a new TV!
Where did you get the cash?
I stole it from my aunt!
Did she find out?
No, she is old and would never know!
That's horrible, you can't do that!
I got this money from my elderly Aunt aka work.
You stole money from work.
Kind of.
You don't make any sense.
haha that's a rap song.
It is.
I went to my aunt's house last week, and came across a windfall!
Really? How did that happen?
There was an envelope full of cash, and I grabbed it.
Oh man, how much money was in it?
It was about $500 and I spent it all on video game stuff!
Did you tell your aunt?
I know that everybody has been feeling lonely lately, so I'm throwing a big party with all of our friends and family.
That's a great idea! I haven't seen my parents in days and I'm starting to miss them.
Your parents are invited too. Everyone's going to be there.
That makes me feel a lot better. Thanks, Quinn.
I know everyone has been missing their friends and parents.
Yeah, I miss them too.
I have an idea about what to do.
What kind of idea?
I'll throw a surprise party, it'll lift everyone's spirits.
That sounds awesome.
I threw a surprise party for all of them and invited their friends.
That's so nice of you!
They missed their friends and parent.
You took a good decision by surprising them!
Thank you!
I just wanted to lift your spirits.
Thanks for throwing the party and inviting our friends.
I wish your parents could have been her but the border was closed.
I am just thankful for what you did.
Hey Mr. Sullivan, I was hoping that I could get my test postponed to next week?
Is this related to the school swim team that you are on?
Yes, I have a meet that is going to run late in to the evening.
I understand and we can push the test back for you til next Wednesday.
I really appreciate it and I will be studying hard for it.
You have a busy schedule and I admire your tenacity in the classroom and in the pool.
I must have looked over my shoulder five times.
What were you doing?
Nervously breaking into my old apartment to get some stuff out I left in a cabinet.
Did you still have a key?
Yeah, I was given three keys and forgot to return the key still in my backpack pocket.
Did you find what you were looking for?
I am really nervous about this whole thing. Who is that behind us?
Don't worry Alex, that is just my friend. I invited him.
Why would you invite him to something like this?!
Don't worry man he's cool. I've known him for years.
Gee I hope you're right man.
Yup do you see what book I'm pointing at?
Yeah.
That's the one me and Alex read together.
Nice.
Oh what book are you reading?
I am reading this new book by Smith.
Wow I have read that book.
Really? Did you like it?
I actually loved it, I think you will really enjoy it.
Well that is great to hear.
Hey there, what are you reading?
Hi! It's Tom Clancy's latest book!
Oh, yeah, I've read that! It's one of his best!
I just love his stuff. I just started this one and I'm already hooked!
I know, right? He has a knack for grabbing your attention, that's for sure!
Yep, I haven't been able to put it down!
Oh that book you are holding is very interesting!
That is good to know. Have you read it?
Yes, and I couldn't put it down.
Wow, now I am excited to start on it. I was actually debating on buying it.
It is a very good read, you should purchase it.
Okay. Thanks for the input.
I like to put up pictures from my past so I can remember the good times.
That really helps.  It personalizes your space too.
I have pictures at home and work.  My co-workers come by to check them out.
That gives you something to talk about.
True. People love talking about family and their kids.
That makes you more relatable.
Check out all the pictures that I have on my wall!
Wow, you've got quite the collection of photos on your bulletin boards.
That's right. I have pictures ranging from my childhood through college.
Why didn't you just make a scrapbook?
I like them on my wall so I can always remember the good times from the past. That's better than just stuffing them into an album I'll never see.
I suppose you do see the photos on your wall every day.
I have pictures from all the vacations I've been on. I need frames.
Are you going to hang them in the living room?
I'm putting them all over the house.
They really do show all your adventures.
Yeah. I love all the  memories from the good times.
Maybe I will start taking pictures when I travel again.
Are you having fun fishing? I love teaching you this kind of thing.
Yes! I hope one day I can be as good as you
Haha you will! You have a good teacher.
When did you learn to fish?
My dad taught me how to fish when I was your age.
Just like you taught me!
Hey, I'm going camping in July, wanted to see if you and your family want to come
That's a great idea, I'll run it by Mary
Yea I thought our kids would love it to
I know they will!
Yes, I really look forward to it
Awesome I can't wait to get back out on the river
I asked Austin's mom and dad when I slept over this weekend if I could go to the camp with them in July.
That sounds so much fun.  What did they say?
They were excited about it.  They said I am more than welcome.
I know you will have a great time with Austin.  Where are you guys going?
I think we are trying out a new camp site thirty miles away from the city.  It's by a lake and we are going fishing.
Catch some big fish for dinner.
I have some vacation time coming up from work in a few weeks.
Where are you thinking of going?
I was thinking of going to the camp in July with Austin and his family.
That sounds like it would be fun I'm sure everyone will have a great time.
I'm hoping they will I just have to contact everyone and see what their schedules are like.
It can be tricky getting everyone together but I think you'll have enough time.
Hey Bethany, look into this glowing box over here.
Why, what does it do.....
Good. Keep looking. Ha, ha, ha! My mind control device seems to be working perfectly! Now let me test it out. Bethany, go next door and steal the TV.
As you wish, Aubrey.
Wonderful. As the San Diego-area's premiere super villain I am sure to gain power over the city with my mind control device. Too bad it only works on women.
Aubrey, I couldn't lift the TV, so I brought the cat instead.
There has to be a way to do this all
There really does
I think that overall there is a good way to do things
yeah I think you can figure out a way to get all the books and stuff out of the way
There is quite a bit done to get the books out of the way
I think we have our solutions though
I had to improvise a way to carry my books without a backpack.
You didn't just stack them and press them against yourself?
I tied them together with string and carried them.
Were you trying to remain inconspicuous or something?
It's just I carried books stacked up against me like you mentioned, and people always try to trip me when I do that.
School kids can be cruel.
I can't believe in this day and age, I have to carry all these textbooks. I am going to break my back.
I know, I am taking a physic class and there's three books.
Try English Lit, I have 5 books for that one.
Well, I am using my sister's exercise bands to carry my books.
Great idea!! I have been using my shoe strings.
How can that be? You're wearing loafers.
It is always fun spending time with my friends!
I guess your friends are cool to be with!
Yes! I like spending time with them. this past weekend I saw a movie with them.
Did you enjoy the movie?
Yes, it was fun!
Come inside.
Is there anything I can help you with?
Yes, you can help me decorate for the birthday party.
Sound like fun!
I can't believe my wife is turning 40 already!
Wow, she barely looks 30.
Yeah, I'm going to have a party for her this weekend, I was planning to invite you but first can you give me a hand with some decorations?
Sure, I'd be happy to help.
Thanks a lot, lets go inside and finish this real quick.
Sounds like a plan.
I got a lot of compliments on the garnish on the breakfast.
Where did you learn to garnish food like that?
I went to culinary school for 3 years.
Oh really, why didn't you become a chef?
I worked in a restaurant for a year, but it was a lot of work. So when my current job came along I took it.
Wow that's awesome.
We had quite the meal together, it was almost straight out of a picture book.
Putting those culinary school skills to work, eh?
That's right! It was just a plate with an omelette and some potatoes, but I made it look all fancy.
What did you do?
I put some garnish on the omelette and arranged things just like you would see in the fancy restaurant. If nothing else, culinary school taught me how to make a dish look nice.
You must teach me your ways so I can impress my boyfriend one morning.
I learned so much at school.
What did you go to school for?
Culinary arts, I love to cook.
Oh that's right, you want to be a chef.
After school I will be.
Yeah your garnish looks good on my eggs.
Hey would you like something to drink?
I would love something sweet to drink.
Ok I'll check what we have in the refrigerator.
Thanks man.
Well all I have is milk will that be ok?
It's not sweet but I'm thirsty so I'll take it.
You look thirsty. Want a drink?
Yeah, I'm famished.
The only thing I have for you is milk. Are you lactose intolerant?
Nope, and I love milk! I'll drink the whole carton.
Thanks for coming over! Would you like something to drink?
Can you get me a mix of some Jack and milk?
Jack and milk coming up right now. I am thinking I would like something sweet.
What are you wanting to drink?
I think that I will make me a sex on the beach.
That is a sweet drink and will get you drunk quick!
I was trying so hard to cheer up my friend today
what was wrong with your friend?
He broke up with his girlfriend so I tried to make him laugh
Did he laugh at all?
No he did not, so I tried another joke!
That is nice of you to try and cheer him up.
I thought that was a funny joke. You obviously disagree.
No, it is funny. I'm just not in a jokey mood. Breaking up with my girl doesn't make me want to laugh.
I don't blame you. So you probably don't want to hear about the priest and the rabbi, right?
I know which joke that is. And that one is definitely not funny.
Yeah, you know what, you're probably right.
Keep trying, though. Eventually you'll get a smile out of me.
It took me forever to reach the top.
How long did you climb for?
It took  4 days to get to the top.
That's a long climb up a mountain.
Yes, but it was so worth it, the view from the top was amazing.
I bet!
Let's see if  I can open these projects up so I can see how well they understood the lesson
Your class has greatly improved this year
I really hope so, it's hard being the professor sometimes
Things have changed so much since I was younger. looks like they can submit things online now
Yea, things are so much easier for everyone now
Hi how are you?
I am good. Are you coming out today?
I don't think I will
Why? What got you so busy?
I opened the projects submitted by the students in the online form so I need to check it through.
Okay no problem.
My computer is having issues.
Do you have the students projects backed up?
I planned to, but have been so busy.
I think that I got it. Here you go, it opened up. The projects are all listed in order.
Can you make a backup for me?
Bailey is not the best gardener.
What happened?
Her tree would not grow until I gave it a little help.
That was very kind of you.
She thanked me by baking an apple pie with some delicious apples from that tree.
That is a great reward.
Look at how big and beautiful your tree got!
I know! Thank you so much for helping me with it! I can’t wait to make apple pie!
Yum, me neither. Should we go pick some apples for it?
Sure! We can bake the pie together if you want!
Awesome! It’s gonna be the most delicious pie ever.
I can’t wait! Let’s start picking!
I tended to Bailey's tree whenever I visited and helped it grow.  It produced some delicious apples that I've used to make these apple pies.
Those pies look too good to eat.
They do look and taste amazing.  I've already eaten one.
You are such a talented chef.
I grew up making apple pies so they are kind of my specialty.
I can't cook at all.
How does the apple pie taste? It basically grew the apples myself.
It's way better than store bought apple pie!
I managed to get Bailey's apple tree to grow some fruit, so I picked them and used them for the pie.
You certainly have a way with plants. Bailey has been trying and failing to get that tree to produce fruit for years.
Would you like some apple pie?
Yes that sounds amazing.
Here you go tell me what you think of it.
Wow this apple pie is delicious!
I'm glad to hear that because the apples came from your tree.
Wow I'm glad you were able to get the tree to produce apples.
They are fighting loudly again.
Should we visit them?
I couldn't sleep. I will try to watch a movie.
Let's not intervene on their affair.
Let's just watch movie instead.
Good idea. Hopefully we can get some sleep.
I can't sleep.
What is wrong with you?
The neighbors are fighting again and its so loud that I can't get any sleep.
That is so bad.
I am trying to watch a movie.
That sounds cool
Good grief--the neighbors are at it again.
I can't sleep either.
Do you want to get up and watch a movie?
Sure, sleepovers are for staying up all night anyway.
What would you like to see?
You pick one--odds are I'll fall asleep before its over, despite my staying up all night comment.
My neighbors where so loud last night. I was trying to sleep but instead I watched a movie.
What movie did you watch?
It was one of the action movies, I wasn't sure what it was I was too sleepy.
Ah that sucks that they were so loud.
I was so nervous on my first skydive
How did you get ready for it
I took in really deep breaths and it helped me
I heard that is the best way to prep yourself for a skydive
It worked great actually
Hi, I am John. Who are you?
I am Jercy. I'm working in the US and you?
I'm working in the US too. I enjoy hockey and you?
I do too. What are you doing?
I'm spending lockdown with my family and you?
I'm working from home.
Oh my God I am so nervous this will be my first time skydiving!
Trust me this is pretty easy and exciting, just relax.
Okay I need to take few minutes, then we will be good.
Come on don't be a scaredy cat, I will be with you.
Okay, let me take a deep breath and face my fears.
That's the spirit, lets do this.
I thought that Casey did really well in the interview and she will be perfect for the job.
When will you hire her?
I will interview some other candidates just to be certain but within this week.
That is good for her, she deserves it.
She has been working really hard to get this job, so yes she does.
She is such a hard worker and will do great for your team.
I interviewed Casey today. I can tell by her curriculum that she was perfect for the job.
Did Casey get the job?
We are scheduling another interview for her with the CEO. If everything goes well, then I don't see why not.
Casey must be excited about that. She was telling me about this job opportunity.
The position pays well and she'll be working with top-level executives.
That's really great exposure.
I interviewed Casey today and asked her what her plans for managing the students and ensuring that they're retaining the information are
I heard she has developed a curriculum that incorporates all of the learning styles to appeal to all students.
What's included in that curriculum?
Each lesson encompasses different ways through visual, learning by example, and memorization.
I believe that she is good for this position. When can she start?
She told me she will be able to start in two weeks.
I was helping my friend Casey today.
What type of help, like for what?
She has a job interview coming up that I was helping her prepare for.
I see. How did she perform in the practice?
She's ready, I think she is perfect for the job
Great! I'm sure with your help she will get it.
I went to a great lecture held by Jesse earlier today.
Oh nice! That's exciting.
Yeah, I haven't been able to stop talking about it. I even referenced the same analogy he spoke of during his lecture.
Wow, it must have been good.
It really was. I was very impressed.
I will have to attend his next lecture.
I really wanted to visit my cousins.
I hear you! How far away were they?
Well, they were in Florida so it was quite a long drive.
Wow, that was a nice ride!
Yeah, it was really relaxing.
Yeah, I bet it was nice to see everyone!
I am driving to visit my cousins in Florida.
Where are you now?
Georgia.
It shouldn't be that long of a drive from Georgia.
It's like six hours.
Oh dang, I thought they lived closer to Jacksonville.
I got Bailey's kids a toy today.
That's nice of you. Why did you do it?
They told me about being bored of their old toys, so I wanted them entertained and happy.
That's cool. I am sure the will consider you as the cool uncle now.
I bought a toy for Bailey's kids so they can be entertained.
You are so nice.
They can be loud and obnoxious if they are bored. I am only looking out for Bailey's sanity.
That's one way to look at it. What did you get them?
I bought them a board game so they can all play at once. There's four of them so that's perfect.
Sounds like a great idea.
I bought Bailey's kids a toy.
That's so nice of you.
Yeah, I did it because I wanted them to be happy and entertained.
Oh! That's thoughtful and selfless.
I'm so close to my big break, I can taste it.
So the audition went well?
Beyond well. I was nervous going to the casting call but I nailed it and they offered a part in the movie right there.
Whoa, that's amazing. What's the role?
I'm going to be one of the teachers at the school.
Nice! I'm going to tell everyone I'm friends with a celebrity.
I can't believe that I just got casted in a movie.
How did that happen?
I want to a casting a few days ago.
I didn't even know you auditioned for a movie.
Yeah. I just got the call a few hours ago.
I can't wait to watch you in the movie.
I am going to be in a movie!
Congratulations. How did you land the role?
I went to a casting that was held by the new company.
I can't wait to see you on screen. You have what it takes.
I didn't want to spend a lot of money on gas but I had no choice.
I hate driving through the town because gas cost so much.
It’s unavoidable due to the location.
I wonder why gas is so expensive in this town?
That's a good question, I'm going to look it up.
Let me know what you find out.
The gas in this town always costs so much, but I had to fill up regardless.
How it is so expensive?
No idea, but I always try and avoid using them if possible.
Understandable, you don't want to be out of pocket that much.
See, you understand!
Yeah, I do!
I found out Robin was trying to steal a sandwich when I was at grocery store with her.
Oh really? That's weird. Well she might be going through some tough times financially.
Hmm, yeah that's rough. Still, you don't do that stuff. I tried to stop it. But you know what, now that you told me that, maybe I'll help her out someway.
I heard she lost her job. You know, things are tight for everybody out here. It's good that we help each other out.
Robin was trying to steal a sandwich in my store.
Did you call the police on her?
No, I got in front of her and took the sandwich from her.
Did she say why she was trying to steal it?
She lost her job and didn't want any of us to know. I gave her money and took her shopping.
She is lucky to have a friend like you.
I caught Robin trying to steal a sandwich yesterday.
Really? Did she say why?
She lost her job last week, so money has been tight.
That's terrible news!
She'll be fine. She looked hungry so I bought her the sandwich, then took her shopping.
You're a good guy, Alex.
Well I finally did it.
What did you do?
You know. That thing we talked about. I did it.
Wait, what? You mean you killed your wife?
Well we probably shouldn't say that out loud. But let's just say she won't be nagging me anytime soon.
So, does that mean we're moving to Mexico together like we talked about?
I should have kept my mouth shut! I told my girlfriend about my ex cheating in the bed we were in.
That was stupid! Your only choice now is to get rid of that bed.
What is the big deal? It's just a bed.
Not in her eyes. That's where you slept with someone else, man. Get rid of it, or no sex for you forever.
Sorry, I didn't make the barbeque yesterday, I was really hankering some ribs!
Then why didn't you go?
My mom is out of town and she is worried about the house since she couldn't clean it, so I spent the day cleaning it for her.
Oh that was so nice of you, you are a great daughter!
Thanks but I'm still hankering those ribs.
Well, guess what, Bobby has a entire pan of leftovers for you!
I asked Remy for Alex's number. But it caused some drama.
Why, what happened?
Alex didn't want to talk to me, so he started asking who shared his number.
He didn't find out, Remy didn't admit it was her.
Sounds like he was having a bad day.
Hopefully he just chills out!
I still can't believe I had that heart attack.
Really? You didn't really take care of yourself.
Yeah...I guess not...I didn't really watch what I ate or drank.
Yeah! You ate and drank way too much!
Probably shouldn't have eaten takeout and drank every night....
No! Now is time to fix it!
I've always been a wild man when it comes to smoke and alcohol. I used to drink beer and eat takeout food everyday.
Ha! Me too Grandad. You're the best. So am I.
No, it's not funny. Listen to me If you don't want to have a heart attack at age 45 like I did you'd best take care of your health.
45? That's far too young to have a heart attack Granddad.
It's the truth. It nearly killed me and I had to spend years sober after that.
Okay Grandad. Maybe just one or two beers for me then.
I've always loved to drink a lot.
yeah I know, you had a heart attack and you are lucky to be alive.
sometimes you just have to live life.
you really need to stop this sort of behavior, the doctor said you might only have a few years to live.
That might actually be true, I had a heart attack when I was 45 already.
I am warning you Alex, if you don't take this type of life warning seriously, you are totally going to suffer the consequences and they are  for sure not going to be pretty at all.
I didn't bother looking after myself. I drank too much and ate takeaways everyday.
Really, but you should have cared more about your health and wellbeing.
Not only that I drank beer every night. It's not surprising I had a heart attack at the age of forty-five.
That's really very uncool of you man.
My wife, Jordan and I went on a road trip.
How long was the drive?
My wife and I drove in one car. Jordan drove his car.
How was the trip?
Well, we noticed that Jordan stopped. He called and asked my wife to stop for gas and bring a tank to him. We noticed he ran out, so we stopped to help him get gas.
He should've filled his tank before starting the drive. But at least you and your wife helped him.
My wife, Jordan and I went on a road trip across the weekend.
Awesome, how was it?
It was great, but we did have to save Jordan on the journey.
What happened?
He ran out of gas a few miles in, but then asked my wife to stop for gas and we had to run to a gas stop for him.
Well at least it wasn't anything bad!
So the other morning Jordan called and asked my wife to stop and get him a can of gas.
What, did he run out of gas or something?
Yeah, he was on his way to work and ran out of gas on the freeway.
Did she pick some up for him?
First he stopped where he was at to see if he wanted to go with her but he decided to stay with the car, so she left him there.
I hope he got back safe!
So Jordan yesterday asked my wife to get his gas
Why? Did he run out but didn't want to leave the car alone?
Yes, something like that.
He should really got to get that gas guage fixed
oh, how do you know it's broken?
Jordan told me it gets wonkey in the heat
I'm making a five course meal tonight. I want to ask Taylor if she wants to come over.
You're inviting her? For a formal dinner?
Sure . I like Taylor a lot. I thought we'd get to know each other.
Oh, well. What are you cooking?
Roasted duck and yams.
Sounds delicious. I'm sure Taylor will accept the invite.
I'm gonna invite Taylor over. I hope you don't mind.
I don't mind at all. Taylor seems like a nice girl.
She is. I'm going to cook dinner for her.
Do you even know how to cook?
I'm sure I can get some kind of recipe on the internet.
I'll be willing to taste test your food.
I've been wanting to get a houseplant for a while, and I got one yesterday.
Weren't you saying the other day that you were scared you would kill it.
I am, so I got a cactus, they are super strong and if I forget to water it, its okay.
I guess it will have a better chance at survival they any other type.
Sure it will.  I got a pot, filled it with cactus soil and plopped it in there.
Just remember to water it occasionally, give it a fighting chance to grow
I'm trying to get a house plant to grow.
Is that tough for you?
They don't live past a month with me.
Yeah you don't really have a green thumb.
I don't have a green anything. But I put a plant in some soil and we'll see what happens.
Well I'll keep my fingers crossed for you.
Notice anything different about the living room? I got a houseplant!
You went and bought one from a store?
No, I actually got the pot, soil and plant separately. I bought the pot, filled it with soil and then put a plant in it.
You picked a really striking looking plant. I like it.
I have always loved plants.
Let’s get some soil and start planting.
A houseplant would really brighten my kitchen.
It will definitely be an attraction.
That will be my next project then.
I will help you on that one.
I did not realize that not having a car around is so difficult.
What happened to your car?
It broke down on the freeway last week, I had it towed to the shop.
oh, I'm sorry to hear. If you need a ride, or anything from the store, just let me know.
That is so good to know. I am good right now. But I'll take a rain check.
Any time. I'm here to help in any way.
I cant believe I was so dumb to park in that handicap parking spot
I told you it had a blue sign at the front of it
I thought you were just joking with me to pull a prank
you're lucky you only got it towed because that disabled guy was really mad
I'm still waiting for when I can get my car back.
What happened to it?
I accidentally parked at a no parking zone and it got towed.
Do you have to pay to get it?
Yeah. A lot of money.
I guess it's better than paying for a taxi anytime you want to go out.
I finally got out of that minimum wage job.
How did you do it?
I just kept applying over and over internally until one of the higher positions opened up.
And they placed you there with a raise?
Yes, the new position comes with a better salary.
Well congratulations, that must make you so happy.
I had been working a minimum wage job, but I've got a better job recently.
I'm proud of you. congratulations!
Thank you!! I was tired of feeling like I was working for nothing.
I can understand that. Minimum wage can be frustrating.
It was. I felt like I never had enough money for anything.
I'm glad you were able to get a better job. I hope it works out well for you.
I had to make sure my voice was heard.
We heard you loud and clear Jan.
Good, that was the point of all the screaming.
You know that's your natural voice.
You have jokes today!
Im always dishing out the jokes.
I just won a screaming contest.
I've never heard of such a competition.
It is quite popular. A lot of people participated in today's contest.
I wonder how they decide the winner.
I ended up winning the contest.
You did scream the loudest, I thought that my eardrums would burst.
I am going to spend the money on a new bike.
All those screaming matches we had payed off. LOL.
Sorry I sound so hoarse. I won a screaming contest yesterday.
Oh I was wondering why your voice sounded weird!
Yeah that's why. It was fun though!
What did you win?
I won $100 and a bag of throat lozenges.
That's awesome, and funny too! You should use those throat lozenges today.
I haven't seen Aubrey in over 15 years. Isn't that crazy?
Yeah, it's amazing how fast the time goes by.
The last time we were together was that trip we took right after graduation.
I think so. That's the last time I remember. Aubrey has thought about you a lot though over the years, that's what she told me.
I guess we were both too busy with work and children to make time for old friends.
She was always hoping that you were doing well. We all need to make up for missed time.
This really made me think.
What was that?
It seems like the reason Bailey died was due to an accidental hit to the head with a hammer.
How do you mistakenly hit someone in the head with a hammer?
I told you it made me think.
It's making me think too.
I can't believe that I'm dealing with such a big case
What happened?
I'm a suspect in a murder trial, but the death was accidental
Oh wow, that sounds really intense
Yeah I just don't know how to prove that the cause of Bailey's death was an accidental blow to the head, no one believes that.
Well, you should definitely try and get a good lawyer
I have not been with my family for a long time now.
I think it is the best time to join them now.
We are planning to have a whole day together.
That is a wonderful idea.
I miss them so much.
I am sure you will have a great time.
I need to get down to the hospital tonight.
I thought you aren't scheduled for any shifts.
I'm not, but last night my quick actions and fast thinking in the emergency room saved the lives of a mother's babies.
Wow, that's incredible. I'm so proud of you.
Thanks. Her husband wants to thank me for what I did, so I'm meeting him at the hospital.
You should get going then, since there's a lot of traffic tonight.
I had to do what I could to save this woman's babies.
You did a great job, Sasha.
Thank you. I just did what anyone would do.
No, you did what a brave person would do. You acted decisively.
Thank you for the kind words!
We had a pregnant woman with twins today.
Was she the one that got into a car crash?
Yeah, I ended up having to deliver her babies or otherwise they all would have died.
Did the woman survive?
All three did, she woke up a few hours ago.
Wow! You saved her life by being so decisive, that's incredible!
I invited Jordan to the concert but he couldn't get off early enough to buy the tickets.  I didn't want them to sell out so I bought his ticket.
He'll pay you back for it.
I don't doubt that.  He's trustworthy.
Jordan is a great friend.  He's really looks out for people who are close to him.
Yeah, I haven't seen him in a few months.  I thought it would be fun for us to attend a concert together.
Jordan is so easy going.  You are going to have the best time.
I know Jordan is busy recently, so I asked him if I could help him.
Yes, I heard he's busy; and also that he asked you to buy the concert ticket for him.
He asked me that, I'm really looking forward to going with you.
Have you heard them in person before?
No, I know you have.
Yes, you're really going to enjoy it.
I got Jordan's ticket since he couldn't get off early enough to get it himself
Thanks, Jordan must have really appreciated that
It wasn't a big deal, I knew his shift ended too late to be able to get one
I am glad you remembered that or he wouldn't be going!
Nah, can't go to this show without Jordan, he suggested it!
True! It was kind of you to be this thoughtful
I had to ask Ash to help me out this month.
What did you need help with?
I needed help to pay my bills this month.
Then I can help you too. why do you need them paid?
I was in the hospital and I couldn't work all month.
Okay just pay me back whenever you can ! Hope you feel better!
I love making gift bags for all the guests at the wedding
Yeah, I'm sure they really appreciate all your work
Yeah, it's been hard, but worth it
I've heard the guests have really been loving the gift bags too
Well I'm glad because I put in a lot of hard work
I'm sure the bride and groom really appreciate it too
I made gift bags for every guest.
I'm going to hand them out to them.
I think I need to prepare more gift bags, a few more guests have just arrived.
Yes prepare a few more.
I'll make sure to not forget confetti.
I like that touch.
I had to make more gift bags than I planned.
Why didn't you have enough?
I was giving them out to each guest and at the end of the day, they kept coming.
But you didn't run out?
No. I rushed making more in the back of the store.
That's great that everyone got one.
Here's a gift bag for you.
Thanks, Remy--I'll help you hand them out.
Good, because I see more people arriving.
It's going to be a great party.
Yes, I've planned for a hundred.
Well, it's not every day that we graduate--we deserve to celebrate.
I just feel like I'll never get over this breakup. I'm too drained to hang out with Kai today.
That's ok, I totally understand. If you need someone to talk to though I'm here.
Thanks. Maybe in a bit when I've had time to cool off I'll give you a call to talk
Please do! I'll always be here to listen.
I just don't even know what I'm feeling right now.
That is normal with a breakup, it'll get better.
I'm feeling so down today about the breakup.
I know it's hard on you, I'm sorry you're feeling so sad.
I told Kai I couldn't hang out today, I just wasn't up for it.
Hey, maybe if you DID hang out with Kai and get your mind off of things, you'd feel better.
I don't know, I'm just so damn sad, I wouldn't be good company.
Kai is your friend, he understands you wouldn't be your usual fun self, you should get out and do things.
I met a really nice guy today.
Really? What was he like?
He was at the library and asked me what book I was reading. I told him it was Pride & Prejudice. His name is Jesse and his smile was so nice that I felt shy and couldn't look him in the eye!
Wow! What did he say next? Please tell me you didn't just let him walk away.
We started talking about the book. He mentioned some things about it that I hadn't noticed before. I feel like he really listened to me.
That's awesome, you need to talk to him again!
I think I need to go to therapy.
Did something happen?
No, I just met Jesse today and I couldn't even look him in the eyes.
You were just being shy, I am sure meeting him a few more times will help!
Maybe, I just hope he doesn't that I didn't like him. He was really nice.
Well, maybe send him a text later.
I was so nervous today that I couldn't even look Jesse in the eyes.
Who's Jesse? I haven't heard you talking about him before.
We just met the other day. He was very nice, but I was too shy to say much of anything.
You should try to be bolder the next time you two run into each other.
I know Remy saw the lust in my eyes.
Did she say something?
No. But we were alone in her apartment and the urge hit me.
Did you make a move or just sit there?
I didn't do anything. I really wanted to but I didn't.
Good. Stay a gentleman and don't rush Remy.
Remy came over to my apartment after the movie.
Did you go on a date?
Yeah.  She's the girl I met at the burger place.
Did you have fun?
She came over for drinks at my apartment afterwards.  She said she saw lust in my eyes.
Why did she think that?
I've been panhandling for so long that it is easy for me.
That is sad to say. You sit there with the cap by your feet asking for money. That is sad.
It is not sad. That is my daily life.  See I just asked that guy for his spare change.  I am not ashamed.
Well you do you my friend.
I will. I will keep on hustling everyday.
Do you have any spare change you can spare me sir?
Sure, I have some extra change in my wallet right here
thank you very much I really needed this for some food
Try and take care of yourself and have a nice day
I can't believe people are so ignorant.
What did they do now.
They just kept giving me money I sat and held my cap out.
What did you do with the money?
I bought some cigarettes, lottery tickets and beer.
Well, you shouldn't ask people money for that.
We need to ask this guy to give us money. He looks well off.
Be careful. I don't want to end up in jail.
Sir! Sir! We are so very hungry. Can you please throw some change in our cap? Sir! Don't leave!
See...all day sitting on the street. Pennies to show for it.
Let's move to a different spot.
Maybe there's enough in the cap to buy us a drink to share.
I had the worst day. My car broke down in the foothills and my phone wouldn't work there. I had to walk for a mile to get service.
Why didn't you call me? I would have been there in a few minutes.
I didn't want to bother you at work. I wasn't going to have you take off to come get me.
So what did you do to get home?
I called for roadside assistance. I had to wait a couple of hours but they came and towed my car and me, home.
That's probably a good thing. I couldn't have towed your car so you got it all done.
The signal is bad here.
Yeah, you've been out of range all day.
I know I can't get any service here and had to keep trying until I finally get through someone.
Nice. I am glad you made it in the end.
Yeah, in the end I managed.
I ended up getting through to customer service finally when I walked outside the building.
Why do you think your phone did not have good reception?
It is a really old phone.
Oh I see, did the connection hold?
Yeah but I had to stay outside for it to work.
You should just get a new phone.
My phone wasn't working.
The signal sucks here.
Yea we are out in the country.
Try walking toward a building.
Now it's working, although I had to keep trying to finally get through someone.
Great.
The article reveals how Remy put me away.
Did you write the article
Sydney wrote it. It offers a thorough analysis of the case
I will find time to review the article later then, it sounds interesting.
Oh my goodness I had such a late night last night.
What were you doing up at night?
I was studying for that sociology exam all night.
That stinks, you really should have studied earlier.
I know, and to make it all worse I had fallen asleep in the class while taking the test.
Oh no! Girl, you really need to get your sleep schedule back on track.
I probably should not have stayed up all night last night studying, I'm so tired now, I even fell asleep in class.
you could have taken a small nap in the ride over
I don't think I could have because I took three caffeine pills to stay awake
wow, that's actually impressive. did you think you did well on the test?
I hope so
The event is down the hall in the gymnasium 3 doors to your left!
Thanks Carson.  Are you going to the event?
Yes.  And as a matter of fact I'm speaking on behalf of a charity.
That's a good doing.  We'll bring some extra money to donate.
That would be great!  Thank you all so much!
You're welcome!
These people want to know where the event's happening, but they're going in the wrong direction.
Did they change the venue?
They moved the event to the assembly. I just have to let everyone know and make sure they all get there on time.
It's always easy to get turned around at these big events. I got lost just in the parking lot!
We have been here an hour waiting to be seated.
Well the wait is worth it.  Wait until you try their wings.
I hear that they are good.  I am interested in tasting them.
We shouldn't have to wait too much longer.
I hope not but I been keeping myself busy people watching.
Yeah that is fun.  People are interesting.
I hope this week is worth it.
Trust me, it’s gonna be more than worth it once you sit down and start eating.
It must be why we have been waiting in the lobby for so long, this restaurant is so busy.
Oh, I can’t forget about the tasty drinks also.
Do you think we can order a drink or two from the bar while we wait?
I’m gonna call over a waitress and find out.
I am so hungry.
I know. We've been waiting for a table for over an hour now.
Yeah, this restaurant is really popular.
You sure you don't want to just eat somewhere else?
I mean, we've waiting this long already in this tiny lobby. Any time now.
I hope so, or I'm walking to McDonalds.
I already put my baby to bed.
Nice, Do you want to drink some coffee?
Yes, that's my plan, to drink a coffee with the others.
Nice to hear that Skylar.
We all love coffee so we need to do it.
Agree.
I'm going to put the baby to bed.
Sounds good and come get coffee with us.
Okay, I will.
I like black coffee!
Get me an espresso.
Yes, than espresso for us.
I missed out on what the group was joking about last night at the dinner party.
Weren't you there the whole time?
No, I left the dinner table for twenty minutes to put the baby to bed, and didn't come back down until everyone was having coffee and dessert.
The joke wasn't that funny. It was about Luther's new job.
What was funny about his job?
It's ironic that he's teaching English, when he absolutely hates reading and writing!
I just put the baby to bed. Now we can talk freely without distraction.
Okay , but I didn't ask you to leave the baby alone.
No, I wanted the baby in bed as I'm tired from a long day and I need some adult conversation. And I also want to go down to have coffee with the others.
I guess speaking baby talk all day can get tirying eventually.
I don't think I should be working so hard to pay my bills
maybe you could get a better job that pays more
that would be great and I wouldn't have to work so many hours to make ends meet. I am not feeling well after working so much.
come with me tomorrow and we can go job searching and talk to some people
that sounds like a great idea
I feel sick and worn down.
You have been staying out late a lot lately.
I know. I need down time after working so much lately. Going out is my only outlet.
Try staying home and watching some Netflix. You need to relax.
I'm really getting burned out by this job.
Maybe you take some vacation time. Rest up. Go to the beach.
I just haven't been feeling well lately.
Why do you think that is?
I've been staying out late and working too much.
You should try to stay in more and see if your boss will let you take some days off.
I think I'll just stop staying out so late. I need the hours from my job.
Since you're tired let me order some delivery for both of us.
I'm not feeling well.
I think it's because you staying out late and working too much.
I think so too. But I need to work hard.
You should take a day or two to rest.
I can't but I will rest the whole day tomorrow to recover.
I'll wake you up around 8 pm. Sleep tight.
Alex and I went through a lot today.
True. I saw you laying your head on Alex's shoulder.
Yeah, we were feeling closer after such a day.
I know. You worked hard.
Okay, I am going to rest.
Okay.
I went through a lot with Alex a few days ago.
Really?
Yes, I enjoyed my time with her a lot, she's awesome.
Why you guys went there, what were you guys doing?
We were just chilling and talking, I had my head in Alex's shoulder and I loved it.
You like that girl, I can see that. 
For the first time today, I noticed that Addison has brown eyes.
You never noticed that before? How long have you known her?
About 10 years. I stared at her today at the store and noticed it. Really pretty eyes.
She's a really pretty gal.
I've never really noticed that birthmark on Addison's chin until now.
But we are looking at sneakers. Why are you staring at Addison's face?
I wasn't staring, I just glanced.
Of all the times you glanced before, you're just now noticing it?
I guess so, it's kind of cute to me.
Well maybe, but let's go to the register and buy these sneakers.
I caught a look at Addison while we were shopping today.
You did? What did she do?
She looked right back at me. Our eyes locked on one another.
I bet you felt a flutter over that one, huh?
You're right I did. She is so cute it's hard not to look!
Be still your beating heart, my friend!
I'm not coming.
Let's move now.
I gave my mom a word that I will never go out after curfew.
Shrugged that off, we are men.
I don't care, I've promised her.
Okay then, am off.
What Remy did was a big move.
Letting that pawn go really changed the match in a big way.
I agree.
It was a good game.
I really can't believe that Remy made such an amateur move as sacrificing that pawn in the match earlier today.
I saw that, I was pretty astounded.
He basically gave me the match when he did that.
It was a nice point in the win column.
I am not sure that when we play again he will be so easily beat though.
Just keep your head in the match and you will be fine.
I wonder why Remy thought it was a good idea to make that move?
Yes. I thought she had a plan.
But that way I could take her pawn.
Yeah, she probably didn't see that coming.
Next turn her king will be in check.
You're too good at chess Kendall.
Bad move by Remy, I have him now.
Yeah, maybe it wasn't smart of him.
Bishop to his queen
How could Remy make such a mistake?
I know, I was also surprised.
Or maybe you're just too good.
I am extremely nervous about the outcome of this battle. I don't want to die.
We can do it, we just have to believe in ourselves.
Okay, let's try to strategize better.
Got it, now lets head up to the front.
It looks like everyone else on the other side has been taken down.
So I guess that means that we are the lone survivors.
I think about the war a lot.
Were you scared during the war?
I was, I was so scared of dying.
But you didn't die.
I still had to be brave during battle, and I survived.
I'm glad you didn't die.
I gave it my all, I was so scared.
You did really well today Cameron, you survived.
I know, and we didn't lose a lot of men. But we will remember those who have passed.
They gave their lives for our freedom.
I went over to spend a few days with Addison.  We went fishing with Addison's dad and caught a lot of fish.
Did you enjoy yourself?
I did but forgot to apply sunscreen.  I got a really bad sunburn.
Ouch.  Those are painful.
My whole back is burnt.  I have to sleep on my stomach.
That takes a while to heal too.
I went fishing yesterday. It was a lot of fun.
Where did you go fishing at?
I went with Addison's dad and we took his boat to the lake.
Did you catch any fish?
Yes, we got really lucky. We caught a lot of fish.
Wow, my reflexes are getting pretty good.
What do you mean? What happened?
I caught a ball with my hands when I turned and saw it heading towards me at the baseball stadium!
Were you watching a game?
I was, and I was rooting for my favorite team.
Wow, that is pretty awesome. Maybe you should take up playing baseball.
I'm proud of myself today. I made an amazing play during football game Saturday.
I want to hear about it.
I was running downfield, turned to look over my shoulder and saw the ball headed straight for me. I managed to catch it and run it back for a touchdown.
Wow! I bet the coach was really happy about that touchdown.
Definitely! He even told me I was the MVP of the whole game!
Congrats! I bet everyone will be talking about it at school on Monday.
I took up boating late in life.
Why did you wait so late to start?
I had never been before. And I was looking for something. Then a friend took me out, and I fell in love with it.
Did you buy your own boat?
Yes, but I had to save up for years to buy the one I wanted.
And now you get to go out on the sea whenever you want.
I have been searching everywhere for years and finally I think I am going to get a hold of what I truly deserve
what is that ?
it is boating my friend
Oh wow! What made you chase that purpose?
I just enjoy the freedom of what it has to offer along with what I need to do in life in terms of learning and leadership
I know that overall there is a great sense of purpose mixed with passion in you and I enjoy seeing you very happy
I should discovered boating before, this is just awesome!
Do you really like boating?
I found out that my purpose in the world when I started boating, I love it.
Oh wow, I have never tried, but It must be cool.
It is awesome, really helped me to find my way in life.
You seem pretty excited about it, keep enjoying it!
Ever since I graduated high school I felt like I was searching for some kind of purpose, and I finally found it.
Really?  What is it that you believe is your purpose in the world?
I went out on a boat, and I fell in love with it.  I think I want to do that for the rest of my life.
That's great.  Can you make any kind of a living out of that?
I believe I can.  I want to start a business giving boat tours of the local islands and maybe even do things like charter fishing and other things like that.
I think that would be something great for you, and I'm happy that you are so into it.
How's it going? I just got back from the mall with Addison.
I'm good. How did that end up happening?
We were talking in class, and I didn't realize how fun she was, so I asked her to come hang out.
She's new to town right?
Yeah, I showed her some of the local hangouts.
That was nice of you. I'll come with you both next time.
I think Addison is fun to hang out with.
I think so too, Addison is fun.
I will show you around.
Really. That would be fun.
Let's go first to the park.
Okay. Can we stop by a shop first?
I want to show Addison the most fun side of Vegas
Yeah, Addison is so fun to hang out with, we could do this all week
maybe we can hit the jackpots later, shall we ask him?
that sounds like a great idea to me
I had a terrible day at work today.
What did they do to you this time?
Someone broke all the pots in the break room and no one would admit they did it.
Broke the pots? That’s odd.
Well they don’t like me so I can’t say I’m surprised.
I guess you should find some new employees.
Nobody has admitted to have broken the pots at work yet.
That sucks. Keep a closer eye on your employees.
Yeah, I need to pay some spies.
They might not like that though.
I haven't slept in days though.
How was Vegas?
It was really good.
Did you party a lot?
Yea I got drunk every night, that's why I didn't sleep, too much partying.
it's a great gambling town too.
Wow it has been a long few days. This vacation in Vegas was crazy.
Yeah I bet.  I don't think you've gotten any sleep either
You are certainly not wrong.  It is great to get rest and such at this moment and finally be free
yeah, I am glad you finally got some sleep
Me too.  thank you for being supportive to me
of course
Don't worry about my dog because he only barks, he's not going to do anything to the children.
He looks really scary though and has big teeth
he's just a big coward and barks because he's scared of everyone, but I will keep him at a distance anyway, don't worry.
I guess he is kind of cute when you look at him differently
Megasaurus, my dog, has been acting really aggressively towards kids lately.  I don't know what's wrong with him.
That's a dangerous situation.  Megasaurus is a big, strong dog and he could hurt a child.
I know.  I've been keeping him tied alone out back lately, but I'm afraid that if he breaks his chain he might kill someone.
So what do you think you should do about it.
I guess I'm gonna go ask to see if I can find some expert in dogs' behavior.
OK.  I hope you'll find someone.
I had to lock my dog up today, in not sure what has gotten into him. He just went crazy and looked aggressive around the kids.
Man that's crazy, dogs can be like that though.
Tell me about that! One second  angel and next a demon dog. I had to keep him at a distance.
Yeah, just make sure that the kids are protected. You did the right thing.
Good to know you agree with me!
I hate Sasha for giving me orders
What did she do this time?
She told me not to smoke as if I were a kid
That's unreasonable. So what was your response?
I intentionally rolled a cigarette in front of her to show her that I cannot be controlled
Nice act
She was so frightened and scared on the diving board.
Do you think she had a fear of heights?
Yes, but I convinced her that she had nothing to fear.
What did you say to her?
That she was stronger and braver than she realized.
You are outstanding!
Sorry I'm late, I witnessed a minor accident and stopped to see if everyone was ok
Oh my, was everyone okay? did the police come quickly?
Yes everyone was ok, I just gave my statement when I was asked what I witnessed and then I was able to leave
I'm so glad no one was hurt and you weren't stuck there
Me too, I'm starving I hope you kept the food warm!
Sure did, these are still going to be the best tacos you have ever had!
So my side of the story is that she hit me with a frying pan
So the police believed you when you lied to them?
that is the statement that I gave them, so I hope so
hopefully you don't get into anymore trouble over this and get to go home
I hope so too
So I told the officer that the dude punched me. That's the side of the story I gave.
But he has the broken nose?
Yeah. He punched my fist with his nose.
Your poor fist.
I hope the jury sees it that way.
I would suggest a backup plan.
Kendall went out with my friends.  They didn't invite me to go camping with them because not all of them like me.
That happens in large groups.
It's hard to expect everyone to like each other.
That's why I don't hang out with large groups of friends.
There tends to be more conflict.  It's harder for everyone to agreed on things like what to do and eat.  Just basic things.
Things can get complicated quickly.
I had a rough day at work today.
If you don't mind I'd love to hear about it.
My sales team had an important meeting with a client but we were not awarded the contract. As the Director of Sales I'm frustrated.
It's disappointing but that happens sometimes. You'll win some and lose some.
We had spent 6 months on a proposal and have nothing to show for it. And we just lost one of the best leads we had in a while.
Well there's nothing you can do about this. Just move forward and try to win the next one.
I am so sick and tired of my boss and the way our company is run.
What happened this time? Seems you are always angry about work.
We had a meeting and it went terrible and really made me upset. I stormed out of it actually.
I can understand getting really upset, but maybe you should talk to your boss about your concerns.
I have tried and nothing seems to help.
I'm sorry your job isn't working out the way you want.
O.K., I've got my stuff ready.
Me too.
Let's put our stuff together to make sure everything gets loaded and then I'm ready to leave for the trip!
It's going to be a fun camping trip.
I've really been looking forward to it.
And it looks like the weather is going to be perfect.
I kept our stuff together so we would be on time for our trip.
You didn't separate it from the last trip?
Nope. Everything was clean so I just kept it all together.
Well, that was smart since you'll need all the same things.
Plus I had to work and didn't want to be racing around putting our stuff together.
You are pretty much going back to the same place, right?
I got the tree in the ground for Bailey
A tree? Why?
we had an agreement about it as part of the landscaping contract.
Oh, now I got it.
Yeah, so she can be happy with her tree there now.
Nice to hear.
I've planted a tree in the ground  for Bailey.
Wow, it looks nice.
I will have to send Bailey the bill later.
Okay, nice you've got some new landscaping work to do.
It was a great idea to rewrite my speech.  I won the election with it.
Who idea was the rewrite?
Mine.  I didn't think the previous version expressed what I was trying to say.
You have a future in politics, I always told you.
Yeah, like even back in junior high when I ran to be a representative.
I saw your potential and believed in you.
I had to give a speech in order to get elected.
How did that go?
I was concerned enough to rewrite my speech before I delivered it.
That was a wise decision.
It was because the speech was deemed a success and I won the election.
Congratulations on your success.
This ladder is really great and overall it is a good way to get some work done
Yeah this is an awesome ladder
right.  I have a lot of work to do today and I hope this is sufficient
I think you'll be able to complete it all.  I totally believe in you
Thank you
no problem
Today was a busy day for me.
What did you have to do?
I had to fix the roof, so I needed to get a ladder.
Did you finish the job?
I sure did. I did not want to have to do it again tomorrow.
It is always good to finish what you start.
Friday is Jan's last day here, I'm so bummed.
Oh, that's right, she's leaving for college next week!
Yeah, I'm going to buy her something nice as a going-away present.
That's thoughtful of you! What are you going to get?
I haven't decided yet, maybe a nice bracelet. She loves jewelry.
That's a great idea! I'm sure she'll love it!
Guess what I'm going to do?
Buy a Ferrari?
Funny, no I'm planning to buy Jan present from the store because I'm going to miss her.
That's sweet Jordan.
I need to hurry to catch the bus to see Jan.
Don't you think you'll be 15 minutes late?
I know. But I wanted to get her something from the store to let her know I'll miss her.
Why don't you just  tell her the truth, and let her know you got held up at the check out line.
Brilliant! I will go get the bus now.
Say hello to her for me.
I almost got caught but I managed to lie.
What happened?
I am not sure, but I told her a bunch of lies so she wouldn't know the truth about the affair.
She could still find out and then she will be more upset you lied.
I guess I will deal with it if that day ever comes.
I don't think you are handling this right man, but to each their own.
She eventually did not find out about the affair.
How did you go about it.
I fed her lies.
You're such a bad person
I know. There is nothing else I could do.
Just get on with what you want to do
I was in a tough spot.
That seems to be normal for you.
My girlfriend confronted me with the evidence.
You were between a rock and a hard place.
I told her lies so she never found out about the affair.
That is true, unless I say something to her.
Today was a good day at the track for me!
Oh really? How so?
I ran 5 miles on the track today! I'm so proud of myself!
5 miles?! That's awesome! I wish I could run 5 miles!
It's not hard once you build up your strength and stamina. You should come train with me!
I don't know if I could keep up with you, but I'll definitely try! Count me in next time you go!
I had a great run today. I am stretching my distance.
How far did you run today?
I did 5 miles today. I usually only do 3 or 4.
How long did it take you to run 5 miles?
It took me almost an hour. I felt so good. I should have gone for 6.
Do you think you would have made 6 miles?
I took my friends out for dinner the other day.
Were you celebrating something?
yeah, I've got a promotion at work because I worked hard.
Congratulations! You deserved it.
Thank you!
So are we going for drinks soon?
Have you been waiting long? Forgot you were coming today
Not really. Where were you though?
I went to the family farm. I had to burn some trash so I did it there.
Isn't it dangerous to set fire in the farm?
No. I made sure the spot I used had just dirt. Nothing would burn around it.
Cool! Can I come with you next time? I'd love to visit your farm again.
Hey can you grab that bag?
Sure, taking this trash to the usual spot at your family farm to burn it?
Yep, just have to get a little ways out from the house
Do you have water?
Yeah, the hose is hooked up.  I can get it if we need it, but this should just burn out in the next hour or so.
Okay, cool.  Need anything else before we head down?
Did you see the smoke from the fire earlier?
I did. It looked like a raging bonfire! What happened?
I set the fire on purpose. It's how we burn the trash at my family farm.
That's really interesting. The only way I've ever disposed of trash is by throwing it in a plastic bun.
I asked Alex if he could you help me with dinner.
I thought it was your turn to cook, Quinn.
Well no, Alex and I decided we were both going to prepare dinner.
I see. It sounds like you get along well.
We do, do you want to come and see us soon?
I'd love to.
That chicken dinner I made last night was tough.
But it was delicious.
I actually had a secret ingredient.
What was that.
Alex's help, I needed it desperately, especially to cook the chicken. I don't know how to cook chicken.
That's a good ingredient.
I'm organizing my schedule this week.
Why would you do that?
Well I need to stay organized.
How?
Well I try to create to-do list when working to stay organized.
I love doing that, I'll send you a template that works for me.
That tornado was the scariest thing that has ever happened to us!
Are you guys okay?
Yes, but it took everything Carson had to keep my head down when debris was flying towards us!
I would have been freaking out, that is so scary
Thank God we made it out alive!
Yes, thank God indeed!
I can't believe what just happened. I almost died in that storm!
I heard about the tornado warning. What happened?
We were running to the storm shelter in the back yard and a satellite tornado came down right over our house, tearing a chunk out of it.
Your house is gone? That's awful. I'm glad you are okay. How about Carson?
He saved my life, actually. The house debris was flying right toward me, but he helped me duck to avoid it. We ran to the shelter and made it just in time. It was the scariest moment of my life!
I would've passed out from fear. You're really brave, Skylar!
Hey, you know the latest? I became the world's oldest person, they called me earlier to let me know.
Oh wow, really?
I was surprised too.
Hw did you do that?
Simply by adhering to a strict diet of healthy foods and exercise routine.
Nice!
I only got to be the oldest person alive by eating healthy and exercising religiously.
You mean you were able to stick to that all these years?
Yes, I was brought up that way and I'm a firm believer in healthy living.
You are a remarkable person. I want to learn from you .
Well I have a lot of free time to talk.
Oh my. The remote was not working and I tapped on the table but now its smashed.
Dude, I don’t believe that was a tap.
Man, my friend is going to kill me. These old clickers are hard to fine.
No they are not. Check eBay.
But this one is rare made by Radio Shack.
Oh that was a museum piece.
Do you have a piece of tape?
Why do you need that for?
I accidently broke the back of our friend remote.
Here let me look at it.  Gosh, you were just visiting and made this mess.
I can fix it.  Just give me some tape.
Let me go find some tape.  You are always breaking something.
The remote flew out of my hand and broke.  The back of the remote came apart.  It wasn't even my remote.
Who's remote did you break?
I was at my friend's house.
What are you going to do?
I felt really bad about it.  I told my friend I'll buy him another remote.
The issue is fixed then.
I can tell that Carson was getting very frustrated with this and that is okay
I know.  He gets frustrated easily.
I am going to go ahead and take my turn because I think that's the best option
Right. I will use that time to help Carson calm down a little
that is a good idea.  I think you really know what the right thing to do is
exactly
Today's meeting with Governor Bailey went great.
That's awesome. What was discussed.
Mainly, the environment. He assumed my position but everything went well in the end.
Congratulations!
I'm so happy he thought it was a great idea and wants to implement my plan.
That is awesome.
I do not think Bailey  knows what I must go through in my position.
I think the position fits you Casey, you deserved it.
I know, I'm working hard. Luckily in the end Bailey thought that mine was a great idea on how to fix the environment
I think it is the right idea too.
Carson yelled at me at work today.
What, why? What happened?
We were working on a project and we had a minor disagreement and he just went crazy.
Maybe you should report him to your supervisor?
I think I have to.
It was totally unexpected.  I was working with Carson on our project together when all of a sudden he started calling me names.
What's wrong with him?
I am not sure.  He seemed off that day.  He might have been on drugs.
Is he an addict?
I told him his behavior was uncalled for and I left.
Good for you.
Carson was being horrible to me.
Did you tell the boss?
Yes, we were working together at this project and he suddenly started to yell at me! But I know he was punished afterwards.
Wow, did he cry?
Like a baby!
Ha!  I wish I was there to see!
Hey. How is it going?
Good Remy. I tried to call you yesterday, but your number wasn't working.
Yeah. I know. I got a new phone number.
Oh. Ok. I thought that was strange.
I kept getting these harassing calls, so I got a new number.
ok. That makes sense.
Hey guys, I want to make sure you have my new phone number
Why did you change your number?
I kept getting a ton of harassing calls from unknown numbers
Oh I just block those
I usually do too but it was just too many so the phone company suggested I change the number
Hopefully you won't continue to have the problem
I am so sick of getting these random phone calls.
Who do you think it is calling you?
I think it is just kids prank calling me. They always say absurd things.
I would just get a new phone number.
I just signed up to get a new one actually.
I'm sick of people calling me I don't know
I guess, but what are you going to do about it?
I still don't know, what you recommend me to do?
If the calls continue to persist you should change the number
The problem is that I would lose all my contacts
Not really, you just ask for a change of company number and they will do it if you lose contacts
Jordan did something horrible.
Oh no! What did he do?
He published all my account information online for everyone to see.
Did you call the police?
Yes, I did. I had to contact every company he published and change my information.
He deserves to go to jail for this.
So there is this new girl at work.
What is she like?
She is nice, but chatty. I have so much work to do.
And you don't have time to talk to her.
Exactly. I had to work hard all week.
Nice isn't always nice.
I'm going to order a big sandwhich.
That thing is huge.
I'm going to tip $3.
That's a lot.
Yes, but this sandwich is huge, and it's cheap.
Yeah I see your point, my friend.
Let's go to the deli; I'm starving.
Okay, sounds good.
And I'm paying for both us with my bonus money.
Thanks for buying me this sandwich.
Not only that, I put $3 in the tip jar.
Get a little bonus and now you're the big spender--thanks again.
I ordered a very large sandwich but it's more then enough for me, will you like to share it with me?
yes, I will like that. How much do I owe you?
nothing for the sandwich, but you can give me $3 for the tips I left in the jar.
that a dea,l I will like that.
can you be here in one hour from now?
yes that will be fine will see you soon.
You know Taylor, she is my best friend!
Your class mate in high school?
Yes! we have a lot of things in common.
Like what do you have in common?
She love all types of music I love. so we regularly go for concerts!
She must be a cool person!
Guess what, I got two tickets for Taylor and I for the concert this weekend.
Is it for the metal show down at the Bowery Ballroom?
No, its for the Saturday night EDM festival at Webster Hall.
Amazing! Taylor told me she also got you two tickets for the metal show on Friday.
Hey that's great, we can see two shows this weekend.
I love that you both like the same sorts of music, I guess that's why you are best friends.
I am going to the concert on Friday with Taylor.
Okay, I am bringing a friend too.
Do you also like this kind of music?
Yes, that's why we go to all these concerts together.
I know, it's great to have a friend that loves all types of music like Taylor to go to concert with.
I know, it's great.
The safety of my workers comes first.
That is good business practice.
That is why I hired a safety inspector.
How did it turn out?
Minor changes need to be made for the safety of everyone.
I admire you for doing the right thing.
Lots of my co-workers have been complaining about unsafe conditions at work.
Maybe you should hire a safety inspector.
That's what I did, I don't want anyone to get hurt.
Its the ethical thing to do.
I'm so happy I hired that safety inspector.
How did the workers feel about that?
They were a little annoyed at first, but it's for their benefit.
So they got used to the changes.
Yes, everything improved and now they're safe from harm.
That was a good decision then.
The toilet is flooding, do you know why?
No, I didn't use the bathroom.
Looks like there's something stuck in the drain.
What is stuck in it?
It looks like someone flushed a toy down the toilet. Wait, that must have been me, I didn't realize I dropped it.
Oh that must be annoying.
I have a problem with my toilet
Why, what's wrong?
I flushed a toy down the toilet and now is stuck there.
Why you did that?
I didn't knew the toy was there when I flush the toilet.
That sucks man, call someone to fix it for you.
You know the little toy car my son loves to play with?
Yeah, the blue car?
Yes! Well, I just accidentally flushed it down the toilet!
How did it get in the toilet?
I have no idea but I didn't know it was there. He is going to be so sad when he finds out.
You better go buy another one before he finds out!
Sorry to say this but I didn't realize my son's toy truck was in the toilet.
Oh, no, that was his favorite toy!
It must have fell into the toilet while he was playing.
I'm so mad about it, that was a gift from me!
It's okay, we can learn from this accident and we can always get him a new toy.
I'm sad but okay, I understand.
I had to clean out a clogged toilet today.
Oh, that sounds awful!
Someone put a toy in the toilet and I didn't see it. I flushed it before noticing it.
Did you get it fixed?
Yeah, finally. After about 3 hours. Makes me so mad.
I didn't realize my dad Jesse was so old until now.
Does he need a lot of help?
Yeah, I've been looking after his affairs.
That's a good thing to do, he can be taken advantage of.
I know, so I have to be very careful.
You're a good son.
I have to take care of Jesse as he gets older. He is my father after all.
You are such a compassionate person.
I believe it is my duty to conduct his affairs on his behalf.
I agree. Children owe it to their parents to care for them in their sunset years.
It has been getting more difficult for my mom to do things lately.
Is Jesse having a hard time?
Yeah, she just can't remember a lot of stuff, so I have to make all her appointments and shop for her.
You are a wonderful son.
Thanks, I just want her to be comfortable.
I know she appreciates it.
I did my father Jesse's paperwork for taxes and the estate this weekend.
You're a good son!
I'm their only child so I always look out for them.
Well it's good that you know about accounting and legal things.
I just feel better knowing that someone else watches the lawyer and accountant too.
I am sure you are really helpful to them.
I have to look after my mothers affairs now, she is having cognitive issues now.
That's sad. Does Jesse have dementia?
Well, they are not sure, but she definitely is having difficulty dealing with basic activities.
How do you feel about this?
Well , everyone gets old . I am just glad I can help out as long as she's alive.
Hey man, I moved out of my parents place. It was finally time.
That's good. Might be good for a little change of scenery.
We never got along, we were fighting a lot.
Well now you're on your own, so that's a positive thing.
I just left. I don't know how I feel yet but I think things can only get better.
What do you mean you just left?
I mean me, mom, and dad got into a fight and I packed my car and left.
Was it that bad?
Yes, I had to leave and I will never look back.
If that is how you feel I guess, I still think you should consider what you are saying.
I hope my ball ends up being okay.
Why wouldn't it be okay?
Well my brothers had asked if they could play with it.
I honestly would not worry too much, I mean they are old enough to be wise about that.
I know, it's just that they ruin like every toy that I have. They had to beg to play with it.
You know what though? I will buy you a new one if they break it.
My new ball is not with me.
Oh, and we planned to play it today.
Yeah, my brothers begged me to borrow the ball.
You shouldn't have given it to them.
No, they are my brothers, let's play with the old one.
Ok then.
We broke down on the side of the road.
What happened?
We had a flat tire.
Did you have to call for help?
No, I fixed it myself.
It's good to be prepared for things like that.
Do you need help on fixing that flat?
No, I think I might know how to change the tire.
I can help if it is easy to do.
Thank you so much, I want to be done soon since we're here on the side of the road.
Anything for a friend!
Here is ten dollars for your troubles.
We broke down on the side of the road.
What happened to the car?
The car had a flat tire so I fixed it.
That's good, Addison. I wish I could fix a flat tire.
I can teach you.
The doctor says I don't have much longer till the cancerous tumor overwhelms my brain.
The chemo is working, you'll get better.
No, I don't think I will.  Its why I met with my lawyer to finalize my will.
Its good to have your affairs in order.
I do, I have left all my money and the estate to Ash, my only son.
I know he would just rather have his mom alive and well then any amount of money in the world.
Thank you so much for visiting me!
No problem! How are you feeling?
A little stronger today, thanks. I've decided to make Ash my beneficiary.
This is nice of you! Ash has been a great friend to you, I know!
Yes, he is. Since I have no family, I think it's the right thing to do.
I think so, too.
I was walking past Mr. Rivers house and I heard something rustling in the grass, I had to investigate
Weren't you scared?
A little but I had to see, as I got closer I seen a little creature or shadow or something back there by the fence
Did you get close enough to see what it was?
It was a dog, he was trapped behind the fence and must have been for days, he seemed so hungry, I pushed the fence open and he came running
Oh my goodness, thank God you heard him and paid attention, great job!
Look at that trapped dog by the fence. He looks hungry.
Poor thing. Let's go and help him. open the fence door.
I go and get him out, can you find some food for him.
Yes, sure, what shall I get?
Maybe some milk will do for now
Alright, I'll get the mi=lk and shop for dog food later.
I was walking and saw a dog appear to be hungry in side a fence.
what did you do about the dog?
seem like no one was home, so I push the gate and went in.
did you had any food to feed the dog?
not at that time, so went to get some milk feed the dog before I got him proper food.
that was so nice of you.
Look at that dog over there, it's trapped!
Oh wow, we need to help it.
Okay I will push the fence open.
Good Idea.
I did it, fence is open it's free!
Thank goodness.
Cameron has been helping with rehabilitation. He has done really well.
He is such a gentle and caring person.
I agree. I don't know if I would have recovered had I not been entrusted into his care after the accident.
How is the recovery coming along?
I am feeling a lot better already.
Get well soon buddy. I can't wait to have you back.
I am sure glad you're here to help me, Cameron.
How are you feeling today?
Pretty good.
How's the leg?
I think it's the best its felt since the accident.
You're going to be walking normally any day now.
I feel so terrible about Robin's death.
I understand, it was so sudden.
I thought I would leave this world before her.
it is fate, and she has such a happy and wonderful life.
I always joked I would go before her.
I remember this, if you are sad, you can always count on me.
I am so sad that my cat ran away.  He was my everything to me
I am so sorry about this, I am sure we will find him
I do not think I'll ever forget him
We can hang up posters and see if anyone has seen him
Of course.  That's what I was planning to do.  Thanks for being such a great friend.
Of course no problem, I am always here if you need anything
My cat ran away and Tracy offered to help find her.  She saw how distraught I was and gave me a big hug.
This is so lovely of her. Did you find your cat?
We looked everywhere for her.  We got really cold and tired and decided to come home.  Lulu stumbled home in the middle of the night and curl up in bed next to me.
This is such great news. She found her way home.
I think she was out having fun and didn't want to be found.
She's safe at home now.
Tracy offered to help me finding my missing cat.
That's really nice of her, but how did your cat go missing?
I accidentally left the door open and it ran away.
I am so sorry to hear this. I'm glad Tracy's helping you out.
Yeah, she even gave me a hug to try and make me feel better about it.
my cat ran away last week, when it was being chased by a dog
that's horrible did he ever come back?
he came back after about three days and I gave him a big hug and a kiss. Tracy was helping me looking for it. I was so glad she was there
This is nice of Tracy. I know how much you love that little cat and I'm glad he came back
I had to work the night shift.
Did you just pull in?
Yeah, let me get the shade, it is to bright outside to sleep.
I lower the shade, get into bed and rest now.
These night shifts are taking a toll on me.
What do you do when you get home?
After I drive home I just lay down and pull the shade over my eyes.
Yeah, the light is too bright out there.
I was so tired from working the night shift last night.
A long night at work?
It was. When I got home, I pulled down the shades and laid in bed.
Did you get some good rest?
I did, thank you.
Want another drink?
So after the living room we have the kitchen
why are the curtains closed can we see the view
I will show them later, I would like you to look all new appliances first
I would really like to see the view
Yes certainly. Have you seen the marble countertop?
Oh that is really nice
I went and viewed the house for sale on Back Beach Road the other day.
Really?  Was it nice, and do you love it?
Well,  I had so much on my mind, and couldn't really pay attention.
What's wrong?  Is everything ok with you?
Not really. I found out I am being deployed to Afghanistan next week.
I am sorry to hear this!  I'm going to miss you and your family so much!
I'm giving some attention to the house.
It's important to look carefully when buying.
What else do you think I need to do.
Alright, let sit down and make a plan.
I think that is good.
Let's make sure we are on the same page.
I went on a home tour this weekend and it was so boring.
Some realtors are terrible and have no personality.
I learned that this weekend.
All they are concerned with is the sale nothing else.
I have to keep searching so I can find the right realtor.
I'll look around and let you know if I find anything.
I think we should get out of here.
But don't you want to check out the master bedroom or the kitchen area?
Not really, this house tour is boring me to death.
Buying a house is a big decision, you should pay more attention to things.
I just don't like this particular house, let's go see the next one on the list.
Ok, if this one is a waste of time then let's leave.
Lay your hand out flat into my hand.
Ok.
Now I'm going to massage your palm and pull through your fingers.
That feels wonderful!
Stretching out your hand muscles helps relieve arthritis pain.
I sure am glad to hear that.
Tracy looks so relaxed today.
Yes she does. She has always been so tense.
Yes, I agree. I found out that her tension was caused by her stiff arms.
Really?
Yes, after I have her a thorough massage especially her hand, she suddenly relaxed.
That's awesome Casey, you are a star.
How is this massage going?
It is relaxing.
Your arm seems kind of tense.
It does feel a bit tense now that you've mentioned it.
I'm just going to take your hand and stretch it outwards.
Okay, that's fine.
You didnot even help me, when all the monster appeared.
YOu need to learn your move or I will be helping you out for ever.
I am dead  for the 100 times now.
With practice you will improve
you just want me to stay longer and play with you.
I am sure you like the game as much as I do.
I'm just not good enough.
You work too hard to please everyone, just relax and be yourself.
I agree, but I just can't help it in a way.
Keep at it. It may take times to get better. Just be who you are
I will, but this is hard.
your true friend will love you for who you are.
It always seems that everything I do always goes wrong no matter how hard I try.
Eventually things will pick up for you, just do step by step.
It is easy to say that when you are not in my shoes.
You know that I am here for you right?
Yes I know, so sorry,  I am just having a really hard time right now.
I promise that soon all of this will be like a distant memory and your life will get so much better.
I m so happy you finally convinced me to change my religion
and I am glad that it helps you
I didn't believe the teachings for years but they all make sense to me
I'm just glad I have someone I can spend some quality time with
Kai ask me to convert myself and I did.
Wow that is wonderful!
I'm so happy that I am now a believer.
Bless your heart.
We will be going to church together tomorrow now.
I am so excited and I'll meet you there.
I finally made the decision to convert myself.
Welcome to the faith. Who finally gave you the idea?
Kai has been advising me about the religion.
I am so glad you joint us.
I've been nervous and depressed all day.
What's wrong? You could have called me, when ever you need me
I know. Everything just seems to be going wrong.
I understand I have been there before. You know it's only a temporary thing.
It doesn't seem temporary. I've been just wringing my hands all day trying to think about anything else.
You want to go out for some coffee or something? You could probably use a bit of a break.
What about patty cake? That is a fun game to keep our minds occupied!
I don't even know the words to patty cake!
Well, than we will have to practice that, won't we? But first, let's start with the hands.
So wait, there is words and hand gestures? This is so confusing.
Confusing is good though, because that means we are not thinking about all the issues we have to face in our lives!
When did you become so smart.
I'm ready.
For what?
So see my friends and have fun playing basketball.
Basketball is pretty fun.
It sure is, see you in a bit.
Are you playing in the game tomorrow?
Yes, are you ready?
I have been ready to play all day. Can't wait to see my friends there.
It is going to be fun hopefully we win the game.
It's going to be fun but can't wait.
Alright see you there!
I just pumped up the ball and the ready to go
make sure you tie your shoelaces up
thank you for reminding me, I would have fell
I fell last time and hurt my knee, it hurts
I just meet Alex for the last time.
I heard you two are breaking up.
Yeah, its true.
I'm sorry to hear this. I'm here if you want to talk.
I stopped by Alex's house with a box of all his stuff today.
How did that go?
It was pretty sad to be honest.
That's understandable. Did you get to see him?
Yes, I handed him his stuff and he had some stuff to give back to me, too.
Iam here if you need anything!
I honestly just slept all weekend.
Really? You must have been so tired.
I was, I just needed some time to rest my overworked body.
You should always remember to do some self care.
Yes, I need to get things sorted and don't have to work so hard.
I really needed this weekend.
Had a hard week?
This week was almost impossible. I worked way too many hours.
But at least you completed what you needed to get done.
Yes, I did. And I slept like a baby last night, knowing I didn't have to go to work today.
And you have another night of good sleep ahead of you.
I had the longest week of work ever
Was it just really busy?
Yeah I just worked way too many hours
Well I hope you managed to get everything done
Yeah I did, and I'm looking forward to sleeping all weekend
I think you deserve it after all that!
I wanted to surprise Kai.
How did you plan to do it?
I talked to his friends and invited them for a party.
That is nice of you to do that.
It was so disappointing because none of them came.
I am sorry to hear that, This is not very nice of them.
I'm so stuffed!
What did you eat?
I made a large pot of spaghetti for lunch. I was so hungry.
Was it good?
Yes it was delicious. But I ate it all way too fast.
Next time eat slower and savor it.
I am really hungry do you want to have lunch?
I am also starving, what did you make for lunch?
I made my special spaghetti.
Great, I love when you cook spaghetti.
Lets eat then. Aw yummy.
Really tasty, you've outdone yourself this time.
You know I cannot go without lunch.
You turn into a bear when you are hungry.
I felt hungry enough to eat a bear so I cooked spaghetti for lunch.
You love spaghetti.
And I ate every bite.
I cannot blame you for that.
I am so hungry. What is there to eat around here?
There's leftover spaghetti in the fridge you could reheat it.
Ah, thank you so much. How long should I put it in for?
Probably about 2 minutes at 100%, would do.
Ok. Yum, this is delicious!
Food always tastes good when you're hungry.
Hey anyone else hungry
I am
I was thinking of some spaghetti for lunch
sounds good to me
great
yeah love the way you make your spaghetti !
I am a law abiding citizen.
You will need to do everything right.
I wish they have a stricter law on guns
I understand, I wish the same
Too many people carries guns these days.
Yes and it only makes things more complicated.
I think is important to follow the rules and be safe about guns!
I know, they are far easy to get these days?
Yes, I wish we have tighter laws on guns.
Seriously I fully agree
The world would be much safer without all these guns.
Yes, you are right.
I am now a member of the networking team.
Congratulations to be able to achieve that.
I will make sure to perform my part.
We will all expect the standard you set.
I planned everything out.
Report to us every week.
Outsourcing, planning, co-operating, outsourcing, planning, co-operating, connections connections!!
What are you doing Jordan?
It's just my mantra, todays that big day and I have to contribute my best!
Oh! that networking team meeting you told me about, is everything alright?
I found two new clients both local and working for big co-operations. My boss is going be happy!
Wow, I really need to try this mantra thing.
The job's gotten a little more challenging, now that I'm on the networking team.
I bet it has. Not a lot of room for mistakes in that kind of position.
Not at all. I'm being extra careful with everything I do. So far, so good.
I'm sure it will be fine. You've always been a very diligent worker.
Yeah, I just want to make sure I'm doing my part. I need this to work out.
It will be fine. With the work ethic that you have, it definitely will.
I should have been paying attention.
Are you ok?
Yeah, It is just a small dent. I was thinking about my school grades and went down a one way street.
Your lucky you were not hurt in the accident.
I can't believe I drove  the wrong way on that one way street.
Didn't you see the sign?
No, I was thinking about that D I got in math class.
Distraction while driving is very dangerous.
I was upset about my school grades.  I had failed my chemistry test because I forget the formula.  I drove down the wrong way on a one way street, and nearly killed myself.
you should not be driving if you are distracted, are you alright.
I quickly realized my mistake and backed up out of it.
You are lucky you corrected your error before it's too late.
I could have died and killed other people.
That's very serious.
Oh no, that's a one way street.
Try to back down before another car comes into the lane.
I will, that was a close one.
You seem to be out of your mind today, are you ok?
I am, I just had a tough day at school, my grades are down.
I guess that can upset anyone, but please drive carefully.
Jan really needs to stop bullying my sister or I'm going to end up getting into a fight with him
you told him to leave her alone last week didn't you?
I told him last Friday, but he still hit her
Let me try to speak to him as well
I had a date last night.
Oh, where did you go?
I took her to the movies.
Did you have a good time?
It was good, but made an awful choice on the movie, it was terrible and she hated it.
I'm sorry, man. Better luck next time.
I got to met this singer after the show.
I know that you have wanted to have a backstage pass, to meet him in person.
Sash was so nice, he let me get some pictures with him.
Do you want me to put them in a book for you?
I am so pleased to finally meet you.
Pleasure is mine. Did you like the show?
Yes, I enjoyed it tremendously.
I'm sorry if I kept you waiting. The crowd was pretty huge.
Yes, but is worth the wait. This is a dream come true!
Thank you. It's so nice meeting you too.
It is so awesome to finally meet you in person.  I am glad we finally got to meet after your performance
Sure thing.  It is nice to meet my fans
Can I have a few minutes of your time
Of course that is really understandable
Thanks, your such and inspiration in my life
Thank you so much, this is so sweet
I've spent the past couple of weeks in my garage making music.
You are so musically talented.
Thank you so much. You can be too, if you try.
No I can't.  I am tone deaf.
I've heard you on the violin.  You play that pretty well.
That's because my mom made me take lessons when I was young.
Have you heard my new song
I think I've heard it twenty times today its playing everywhere
Do you like it
Its great, I didn't know you were so talented
Thank you, and guess what, they offered me a record deal
This is great news, we shall go and celebrate it
Did you hear the song I made for my new album?
Oh yeah, I heard it on the radio this morning.
What do you think of it.
It is great,  you worked so hard on it.
I did, it was so much fun, I hope I can create more good songs.
I am sure you will.
I'm a music artists.
Yea heard your songs.
thank you so much, this means alot.
Do you need a drummer.
Yeah, actually we do
Great, I'm a drummer.
Aubrey wrote an example of the problem that she wanted me solve in math.
Did you get it?
I am starting to understand a lot better because of Aubrey.  She just gets it.  Seeing how her brain works is so inspiring.
Aubrey is a math whiz.  I remember in high school she won the math contest.
She's helping me improve my grades.  Once I get my grades back up, I can play join the soccer again.
That should motivate you.
I sure am a lonely soul.
Heya, I saw you sitting in here all alone. Do you mind if I join you?
Not at all! I would love some company.
Awesome! Are you alright?
Sure, just had a few things on my mind, but it is not too bad?
Do you want to go for a walk and have a chat?
just need 5 minutes to clear my though.
It really smells in here. Are you alright?
I lost my mom and then my dog.
I am so sorry, can I stay and keep you company.
 This is lovely of you, I do appreciate some company to be honest.
We can go for a walk, it always help me when I feel sad.
I had a horrible night, ast night.
You ever need a friend, just call me. What happened?
I sat at an empty bar last night in a dark room alone, I needed to sort out a few problem.
You ever feel like this again, come on over to my house.
Thank you for the offer, I will surely accepted it.
Bailey wanted to go on a bike ride and I told him I was going to rain and he got upset.
It's not wise to be on the bike when it's raining.
He had been out in the workshop all day and didn't realize it was so cloudy out.
So what did you guys do instead of riding bikes?
He went back to his Woodworking and then I read a book.
Books work on rainy days.
Today I provided support for a friend who wasn't feeling well.
Sounds like you did the right thing. Go on please.
My friend was having a rough day, and was visibly upset and I could see tears coming down the face.
You mentioned you provided support. How did you help?
I had some paper towels and wash cloths and used them to dry out my friend's eyes. They began to feel a little better.
Wonderful. Sometimes the support of another person can be a good remedy in tough times like that.
You're upset.
yes I am, feeling so bad.
What happened?
Life is so hard.
What makes you say that.
Everything about this.
The dog I got named Riley is really sweet, she ate right out of my hand.
Aw that is nice, so she really likes you already?
I think so, she also cuddled up near me on the couch today.
I wish I could get a dog.
Why can't you get one?
I am allergic to any type of dog fur really.
I just got this really cute puppy from the shelter.
That's great!
I was so scared he wouldn't like me but he ate a treat out of my hand
it sounds like a really friendly dog.
Yes, he is. I think I'm going to call him Sweetie.
That's a fitting name.
Hey come say hi to Riley.
Aww I love dogs! Where did you get him?
I got him from a shelter.
I thought you were afraid of dogs.
Well I was at first, but I gave him a treat and he ate it out of my hand so I fell in love with him.
That is so awesome!
I developed students cognitive awareness.
What's that?
A tool to help students learn.
Did it work?
Yes, it did.
This will great for all these students
You see class, that's why we use them
Thank you, Mr Robinson you are a great teacher
thank you, I wouldn't be here if it wasn't for you kids
 You broaden all of our horizons, and make things more easier to understand
each one of you is special and deserve a great education
thanks Mr Robinson
I threw the ball at Kendall.  I thought she was ready for the ball, but she wasn't. It left a huge nasty bump on her head.
 Is she okay?
She went to urgent care and had it checked out.  She'll be alright.
They gave her some pain killers to help with the pain and swelling.
I feel terrible for causing her harm.
It was an accident.  You didn't meant to do it.
Kendall hit me in the head with the ball today.
That is bad. How did that happen ?
She thought I was looking and throw the ball.
Are you hurt?
Yeah I got a big bruise and lump but my hair is covering it up.
Your too close to the edge!
Thanks for stopping me.
I thought you were going to fall off!
Ha, I was just trying to get a photo.
Be careful next time!
I will!
Sydney said I could do some yard work and get paid for it.
You can make some extra money.
I need to save up for another car.  My car broke and it's not worth it to get it fixed.
This is the perfect opportunity then.
It's low commitment so I can still keep my other job at the mall.
You are working so much.
So they want us to cut the grass and trim the bushes?
Yes, the front and back.
That's a lot of work. It's going to take us at least two days.
Yes, but they pay really well for a good job.
That sounds great. I could use the money.
I know a couple of other families that need yard work done, too.
Are we working on this yard?
yes and we're going to get paid.
That's great.  What do we have to do?
Rake the leaves and bag them up.
Are there two rakes?
Yes, we're all set.
I went out with Taylor last night, I had not seen her for 2 months.
I know that you been busy with school and clinic.
Yeah, I am running on fumes. It was nice to be able to see her for a few hours.
You need to take time for yourself.
I am so glad that I got to spend some time with Ash this week.
I know you two used to see each other a lot.
We always hung out together. Now that she has joint the varsity team she has lots of practice to do.
Pretty soon you'll be able to go watch her games.
That's true, I just miss our old trips to the park to hang out by the water and talk.
The season is only a couple of months and then she'll have more time again.
Hi Ash! Long time no see.
Hi Taylor! You've got that right.
Do you have time for catching up?
Yes, I'll make time to catch up with you right now.
This will be great. I have a lot to tell you!
Just take your time; I've got plenty of it.
Can you hand me an apple and a banana please.
Why are you gathering so much food?
Because I am going to eat somewhere else
We are already here in the cafeteria. Why are you hiding in the bathroom? Just pick a table.
Because everyone talks about how I eat.
Don't worry about them. They are just a bunch of bullies. Come and sit with me.
I ate alone in a bathroom stall today and it was kind of weird.
Why do you eat in a bathroom?
I just wanted to get away from all the noise of the cafeteria, because of my anxiety.
I feel you, next time tell me and I will join you.
Oh for sure, but it was kind of awkward when someone came in to use the toilet right next to me.
That does sound odd.
You would not believe how busy the cafe was today. There were no where to sit.
Where did you end up eating?
I ate in the bathroom.
Oh my gosh, that is crazy.
Yea it had a chair at least
I bet it was also very private at least.
I think I have just about all my stuff in the apartment.
What other things do you have to bring?
I think just what's in this box, including my bow.
I had no idea you even had that thing.
I was in a school archery sport team, years back, it was fun.
So it is for happy memory I guess.
Hey! I'm kind of busy right now, carrying the bow forward into the apartment.
Why are you carrying the bow?
I have to move all my stuff quickly.
Do you need any help with that?
Yes. Could you come over to my new apartment. Here's my new address.
I'll be over in 15 minutes.
I carried the bow into the apartment.  I needed to move all of my stuff quickly.
You mean the bow for your bow and arrow.
Yeah, that bow.  You know I am into archery.
I have seen you.  You have amazing aim.
I've been practicing since I was a kid.
It shows.
So I was moving my stuff really quick, and ran thru the doorway with my bow.
Let me guess. The bow snapped.
No, it was a strong bow, lucky me.
I know you are in a hurry, but be careful.
There's just so many boxes in all directions.
When you're heading in all directions, you're heading in no direction at all.
Do you know what my parents' schedule is like this week?
I don't think they have much planned.
Okay, good. I am coming home this week.
I bet you would like to spend time with them.
Yes, it has been so long since I left for the research trip.
I hope you have a good trip!
I just got a flat tyre. I can't believe it.
Where are you, are you all right?
I am on the highway
What happened?
I was driving on the highway,  when I saw the tyre was totally flat.
That's awful, call for some help.
Pull over quick.  Don't you hear that? It sounds like we have a flat tire.
We're on the highway, OK I will need to pull over to the side here.
I think that it is  on your side.  Can you feel anything?
Yeah it sounds like it is over here.
We were going down the highway and had a flat
were you driving fast
No, I felt a bumping and started slowing down
Did you change the tyre yourself?
Yep!  I was proud of myself.
Learning these things are a time and money saver.
I really should have bought new tyres
what happened to your car?
I was driving around and got a flat tyre!
sorry to hear that. Was this on small roads?
no, it happened on the highway so I had to pull over
I'm glad you are okay, though
I had such a long walk this afternoon.
That sounds like fun. Where did you go?
I just wanted to go around the neighborhood for a little while. But ended up staying for long time because the wagon wheel broke.
What did you do? Did you have to carry the kids home?
No I got lucky and ran into Kendall. She fixed it for me.
That is really luck. She is very nice.
I am so grateful we finally made it back to the ranch before nightfall.
I was worried about you when you did not arrive earlier today.
We were moving along just fine but the driver took the wagon over a big rock and one of the wheels broke right off.
How terrible, you all could have been tossed from the wagon.
Fortunately no one was injured, and our escort Kendall is a clever man and was able to repair the wheel and get it back on so we could continue on our way.
I will have to invite him over for lemonade and pie to thank him for his quick thinking.
My wagon wheel broke.
Why did it break?
I hit  some rocks.
This route is really tough.
I going to need a spare to fix this.
 I'll can help with this.
Thanks Kendall you're so handy
Don't mention it, it was an easy fix
It would of been a pain if we had to carry all that by hand
yeah the wagon came in handy
glad I bought it, probably should of bought the one that was a bit pricier
maybe, those rocks were really rough
I really have hard time at home
what's going on?
it's my parents, they argue all the time and it's so hard to see
I understand. How are you dealing with it?
I just go to my friend's house to play video games to get away
that's good, come to my house if you need some times away from home
Thanks for letting me come over. I'm just so sick of my parents fighting
Not a problem! My parents do it sometimes, too, and I just lock the door and put my headphone on
I need to get some headphones. What game do you want to play?
How about super smash bros?
Sure that sounds fun! I call Kirby!
 Fine, I am Link!
I have always dreamed of owning a boat.
It would be nice to own one.
Since I retired, I have been planning on a boat ride.
Is that why you're headed to the waters?
Yes, we will try the new boat I just bought.
Thank you for taking me.
I enjoyed playing with you.
Yea board games and checkers are fun.
Glad you like them. What should we do next?
I'm not sure.
Shall we go for to teh park for a run and flying kite?
Yes sure, this will be fun!
I played board games and checkers with my friends last night.
Did you have game night?
We gather weekly at someone's else and play games and have drinks.
Sounds like a good time.
It really is.  It allows me time to catch up with my friends while having fun at the same time.
Who's hosting the next game night?
would you like the red or black pieces
I will take red, it is my favorite color
that's a good choice it is mine too
care if I go first?
No, go ahead just make sure you roll the dice.
I will roll it on the board then.
I like playing this game with you.
It's always fun to play games with friends.
Board games and checkers are my favorite games to play.
Let's play a checkers game now.
I'll start first, and then it will be your turn.
Okay, let's get started with this game.
I'm so happy that everybody liked my performance.
Do you put on a good show.
I've been practicing that routine for a while now.
It shows in the way it came together.
I'm hoping to perform it again sometime soon.
Let me know and I'll be there.
I tried to call Sydney to say sorry but she did not answer.
She will come around, I bet she wants to stay friends, too.
I did get her in trouble though.
You didn't mean to leave the list of students on the cheat list out on your desk.
I know but it was still stupid and I deserve her to be mad at me.
Just keep trying to talk to her/ I am sure she will forgive you.
I'm feeling really frustrated and angry with Sydney.
I'm sorry to hear you had such a blowout argument, but it was your fault.
I know. I tried to call Sydney last night to apologize for my mistakes.
How did she respond to the apology?
She ignored my call and didn't answer, which is why I'm so frustrated.
Just give her a little space.
Just finished my first day on the job.
How did it go?
It was great. I was assigned to removing seeds from the plants.
Sounds fun. Are you tired?
A little bit.
Glad to hear your first day went well.
I was at work and I remembered that I was out of stuff like bread and milk when I was on the way home.
Did you run to the store when you got home and pick up some groceries?
Nah, I just stopped on the way home from work that night.
That's probably the easiest way to do it, even  if you're tired.
Yeah.  I was exhausted.  When I got home, I realized I had forgotten eggs and cheese.
 You're such an airhead .
Hey I need to get some milk and bread on the way home from work tonight, do you need anything.
Yeah, but what's open after you get done with work at midnight?
There is twenty four hour grocery store that's a five minute drive from work.
Cool, if I give you some money and a list can you grab me a few things.
Sure, I know you have been busy with a lot of extra work these days.
Great, and I'll give you some extra cash for the bread and milk since you are doing the driving and shopping.
Do you like the song that I played for your wife?
It was awesome, and better than I could have imagined.
Well thank you, being your friend I was honored to do it.
What do I owe you as payment?
I don't want money but you could take me out to dinner at that new steakhouse downtown.
That sounds like a deal my friend.
I really had to save the day for Ash. Did you hear it?
No, didn't his wife have a birthday over the weekend?
Yes, Ash invited over all their friends and family but was so busy he forgot to get her a gift.
Oh, that sounds like something Ash would do.
He ended up paying me to make a birthday card and write a song for her that he could present as his own.
Yep, that is definitely classic Ash!
Hey, how have you been?
I'm doing great. How are you and your doggie doing?
We're both great. He's actually at home while I run some errands.
Will he be alright by himself.
I needed to do some errands but I've perhaps done something I shouldn't have!
Why are you being so mysterious? What's up?
I left the new dog along because I wanted to get out of the house.
Do you think that was wise?
Probably not, and there will probably be poop in the house when I get home.
Maybe come up with an alternative plan for the future? Bring the dog along but leave him in the car with the window cracked?
I had to go and run some errands yesterday and left Tom alone for the first time.
How did they go?
He tore up the cushions, ate the shoes, and the cords.
Next time, you should put him in his crate, so he does not destroy anything!
That is a good idea, he and our stuff will be safe.
I felt really bad having to leave my dog alone while running errands.
Well, sadly sometimes you can't take him everywhere!
I know, but I was worried that we would get a thunderstorm while I was gone. You know how he is about loud noise.
My dog hates loud noises, too. I think they all do.
Yeah. I just get nervous about this, sometimes.
Don't be so hard on yourself. You're dog can handle a lot more than you may think. I'm sure he was fine! But next time ask your neightbors or friends to watch over him when you are busy.
How does the new apartment look?
It's very clean and tidy. Did you do all of this yourself?
No, Skylar helped me. She knew I was inviting some guests and I didn't want the place to look messy.
Well the both of you did a great job. It looks flawless!
Friends are coming over to my apartment.  Skylar helped me decorate it so it looks more inviting.
Are you having a house warming?
Something like that.  There'll be wine and beer and food that my sister, the chef, is preparing.
Am I invited?
or course you are.
Your sister is the best chef.
I was at the pool with Robin today
It was so hot today, I sure it was great fun at the pool
Yes, Robin wanted to jump right in to cool off
Did he do it?
Yes, I had to hold his phone for him while he jumped in
You are a good friend to Robin.
Robin asked me to hold her phone while she goes for a swim in the pool.
Where did you guys go to?
We were at my parents' house in the countryside.
That sounds like a dream.
It was nice to get away from the city for a bit.  It's so relaxing there.
It's nice to have a change of pace.
We got a little drunk last night.
Who did?
Robin and me.
Did anything happen?
Robin jumped into the pool while still dressed in her clothes but before she jumped in she handed me her phone.
Smart move.
Quinn came up to me yesterday, and told me he wanted me to sing him a couple lines because he liked my voice.
Well did you do it?
Yes, I did. I actually really like him and I think he was hitting on me.
That's awesome.
It was kind of awkward because we were just sitting there alone I was singing but it was alright after a few minutes.
I'll tell you what, no one wants someone to sing for them if they don't like their voice.
My friend Quinn told me she loves my voice and wanted me to sing at her wedding.
Are you going to do it?
Of course.  I feel honored.  I am so happy for her and her fiance.
When is Quinn getting married?
In a couple of months so I have time to prepare.  She already told me some of her favorite songs.
That's great.  It sounds like Quinn's found the love of her life.
Didn't I tell you we were going to win? I'm just glad that's over with for now.
I can't believe it, and it wasn't even close. Let's go celebrate,  I'll drive us to the club.
They didn't see us coming. Now is the dawning of a new era my man. I want you to know I couldn't of done it without you.
I will always be here to support. You know there's going be a lot of press out there tonight.  We shouldn't speak to the press tonight.
You're right, I'll meet with the other members of the council at the club, since our guys will have it secured. Make sure they're there, I prepared a speech.
Okay I'll take care of it. I can't wait to see the look on their faces.
I'm so glad I decided to run at the last minute.
Congratulations. You are the change we need.
I'm really surprised we won by so much.
It was a landslide.
Well, I can't wait to start work at the city council.
You're going to be great but for tonight just celebrate the win.
I really wanted to try and make  difference in our city.
That's great. How did you think you would make a change?
I thought running for city council would be the best way
I like that. Did you end up running?
Yes! I even won by a landslide
Wow that is incredible, congratulations.
I am very excited. I just won an election.
Congratulations, I wasn't even aware you were running.
I figured our city council needs some cleaning up. The people voted overwhelmingly for me.
I agree . I trust you to do the job.
I have my sleeves rolled up and can't wait to get started.
You go for it!
I'm down to searching for coins.
It's gotten pretty bad for you.
I needed to get change for the bus so I looked through the couch cushions.
Has that worked for you in the past?
I thought I might find money there.
The job market is not great, but I do hope you find a good job soon.
I am sure, if I just look through these couch seats , I can find some loose change
hopefully people dropped some because the bus is getting close to my house
I think I see some over there in that corner just shine the light here
there it is. that was so close
My roommates and I looked through the couch cushions to find money for the bus.
Did you find anything?
Yeah we ended up finding like ten dollars.
That's enough for a couple days until you get paid.
Exactly.
This tutor has helped so much!
That's amazing. For what class is he tutoring you in?
My worst subject, history! I got A's in my last 3 tests,
That's great! Maybe I should get me a tutor too.
I would definitely recommend my tutor. Here's his number.
Oh my goodness! Thank you so much!
I'm glad I found the tutor.
What subjects were you having problems with?
Just history.
I hated trying to remember all the wars.
I've improved from a D to a B, thanks to my tutor.
I'm proud of you. It's great that you have someone to help you.
Why did you tell my mom
well you really hurt Billies feelings
she deserved it
no, she didn't. Sometimes you can just be mean
she took my ball away
you weren't even playing with it
It's so annoying that Addison's name was put next to mine on the research paper.
How did that happen?
I don't know, I guess she managed to talk the professor into it.
Maybe the professor didn't think it was a big deal and would help her career.
Well it's not fair. She didn't put in all the hard work that everyone else did.
You're right, but there's not much you can do about it now.
I just got my paycheque!
You deserve it after a month of hard work.
Yes! I have decided to buy my friend's food including you.
Oh this is nice of you, I am up then.
Remember all that overtime I did last week.
Yeah, you weren't home at all, I thought I would need to get a new room mate.
Yeah, we got a huge order at work that needed filling, but we got our paycheques today and it was triple what I usually make.
Nice, well you certainly earned it with those long hours.
Yeah, I took the other guys who were on the shift with me out for lunch to celebrate since we all worked so hard.
That was really nice of you, I am sure they appreciated it.
I had it in mind to give a bonus to the best salesman
Who did you give the bonus to?
I gave nobody a bonus.
Why?
None deserves it.
was it that bad?.
I felt that none of the salesman really met the mark this year and fell short
So what are you going to do with the rest of the money then
I think I might add it to the pool for next time and see if they will try harder
I think they might be motivated this time now, that they know you're serious
I would think so
myself and my classmates were studying in the park. Then I saw something beautiful, can you guess what I saw?
a beautiful student?
no, I saw a beautiful bird, I went over to see the bird
what was the name of this beautiful bird, I would love to know
I think that's the rare red breasted cardinal over there
i think theirs only 20 of them in the united states
I cant believe that we would see them in this park
here you go, you forgot your book when you walked away
thank you, I would have forgotten about it
Do you guys see this beautiful bird.
It is very pretty, but we are supposed to be studying.
I know, my book is right over there.
There are lots of birds in the park.
I don't think I'd seen this pretty of one.
Yeah, it is a beauty.
I think Jessie might have a concussion
Why do you think that?
I am a doctor and have studied in this field for a very long time
That's true, what do you suggest that Jesse do?
Can you put her head down on the table for now
Yes sure
I am so excited to get married to Casey, he's my person.
I think it's such a great thing for you two and your families.
Yeah, I am really looking forward to it.
Has he met your sister yet?
He is actually going to meet her right now for a little lunch.
Oh, how fun, they are really going to get along.
Casey met my sister for the first time just recently.
Oh, great. It seems like those two would hit it off.
They did, right away. I was very happy to see it.
That's nice. When is the wedding?
In March, last weekend in March.
That's so exciting. I'm happy for you guys.
Hey Jean nice to finally meet you
You too, hope you've been taking care of my sister
oh you know I have
good, cause you wouldn't want to find out what happens if you don't
Don't worry she's my life
I'm not joking
I may take her to the zoo
I though you don't like the zoo!
She is an animal rights activist. I agreed to take her to the zoo so she could do her thing.
What's in it for you?
I get to be her assistant, which means I get to spend every waking minute with her. The more time I spend with her, the more I learn how to help the animals!
Yes, this sounds good.
I met with an animal activist today!
Where did you meet?
At work, then I took her to the zoo because she didn't know how to drive.
 was it stressful?
Not really,  also assisted her on her research and it was helpful!
You are gaining some more experience, too.
I added tickets to shows at the amusement park, so it was extra fun.
Amusement parks are a blast. Who did you go with?
John and I took our girls.  They wanted to celebrate their birthdays there.
How old are they again?
They're five and seven. Their birthdays are two days apart so every year they celebrate their birthdays together.
That's so cute.
I had a great time with Laura at the amusement park.
Cool. What did you like best?
Well, Laura had bought a bunch of ride tickets. I added more, so we were able to go on more rides.
That's cool! Do you think you'll take her out again?
For sure. She's a lot of fun to be around.
That's awesome. I'm glad you guys had a good time!
I had such a great time today
what did you do that was so much fun?
I went to the amusement park, I had been wanting to!
that is awesome, what was the best part?
I added a few new tickets to my collection!
I would love to do the same, I want to hear more later.
The amusement park was so fun.
What's your favorite thing there?
I like playing all the games.
Do you collect the tickets?
Yes, I have a big collection that I add to every time I go.
You must have quite the collection now.
I feel like tonight was a victory!
You are very talented in this game!
I scored the last remaining points for my team and we emerged victorious!
That's inspiring! Great job Kendall!
Thanks! It was a night to remember.
It sure sounds like it, great job!
We won the championship game last night.
Congratulations, I know you guys were highly ranked this year.
Yeah, we had a really talented team, the best the school has seen in a number of years.
How did you do in the matches?
I scored the most points and that's what got us to the top of the rankings and the championship title.
Nice job, I hope they give you an MVP award for this season.
I had such a good day today out scoring points for our team.
Yeah you made us move up in the rankings which made us available to play in the championship.
You are an awesome soccer player.
If it wasn't for you we wouldn't be here.
I worked hard to get where we have gotten.
It was well worth all of your hard work.
I'm a mess, girl. Not going to lie. Absolutely crushed.
What happened? Is it Ash again?
Yes, Ash broke up with me. Then I saw them with someone else at the bar! That girl!
I would've been really jealous, to be honest.
Yeah, I guess I was. I wanted nothing else than to go with Ash again. But I know it is not possible.
Give it time. Maybe Ash will come to his senses eventually.
I can see how my life falls apart in front of me
It is sad to know that you no longer have freedom
I think about my son, he is little and he has no one to take care of him
He will receive all my support, he will not lack care
Thank you for that, I feel I have no future
Cheer up, things will get better soon
Thanks for making my son feel better.
No problem. I never like seeing him sad.
Same here. I almost never want to see him sad.
That's why I had to do something.
I wish I was better at softball.
Why do you say that?
All of my friends are on the softball team but I don't know how to play.
You mean you don't know the rules of the game?
Well I just learned them and now I'm practicing every day.
Practice makes perfect.
Do you think I'm improving at softball?
Yes, you're doing great! You have a really strong arm.
Thanks! I've been practicing every day.
That's great you're so dedicated. You'll be ready to join the team pretty soon.
I hope so. I don't want to be the only one of our group of friends who can't play softball.
I can't wait to have you on the team. You'll be a great pitcher I think.
Will you help me practice softball?
Are you wanting to learn to play?
I have idea how to throw a ball and all of you play.
We can practice everyday, if you like.
I taught myself how to play softball.
Really? How did you do that?
I practiced every day. All my friends are on a team. And I wanted to play with them.
Did anyone show you how to play first?
Yes, one of my friends practiced with me most days. And days they couldn't I practiced alone.
I guess you were really motivated then.
I can't believe that happened to me today.
I hope you got what you wanted to buy.
That's the problem. I just lost my wallet.
Do you know where you could have left it?
I was already in the bus when I realized I could have dropped it by the fountain.
It's all right. Things could have been worse
I finally got the job offer today.
Congratulations! That seemed like a lot of work.
it was gruelling looking for it then applying and all that.
Does it feel worth it?
Yeah, it's a good position and I start Monday.
Congratulations on the new job!
My shoulders were aching from carry my bag, so I put it down for a bit to stretch out and rest.
What do you carry inside your bag? Is it really heavy?
Yeah, I had so much in it.  It's been so hot, I wanted to make sure I was carrying enough water.
Did you feel better after taking a break.
I did.  It wasn't so bad heading back from my hike because my bag was much lighter.
Sounds like you needed everything that you had packed in your bag.
My shoulder is so tired so I laid my bag on the ground.
I am sure that was a relief.
Yes, I was able to stretch out and relax.
That is good, make sure to take things easy with the heavy bag.
I surely will.
See you in a bit.
Wow, this bag is so heavy, I have to put it down.
Take as long as you need, I cannot even carry it cause it is so heavy.
I think I pulled something in my shoulder, or maybe I just have to stretch.
Oh no, hopefully you can stretch it out!
It is feeling a lot better now, let's keep moving.
OK, just let me know if you want to stop again.
That chemistry experiment has caused me to lose my eyesight and I have purchased tons of books to read over the summer.
That is awful.  I hope you win your lawsuit against the school.
I have no doubt about that.
What are you going to do with all of those books.
I am going to take them all back to the store.
Can I will help you?
The doctor said my vision should clear up soon. In the meantime, though, it's ruined my summer plans.
Yeah, wasn't this going to be the summer where you read all those books you've been meaning to get to?
Yes. I even did a shopping spree at the bookstore. Then this problem with my eyesight happened and I had returned everything.
How disappointing. Hold on, have you thought about audiobooks? I'm sure you can get the same titles in audio format.
You know something? I bet you're right. Wow, that's a really good idea. I don't know why I didn't think of it.
Well, you've had a lot on your mind. But I think you can still salvage your summer, buddy.
After I lost my eyesight, I figured it only made sense to return the books to the store.
You can always get books for people who are visually-impaired.
Like what kind of books?
Books with Braille or on audio.
I've been using books on audio before I went it happened last time.
Even with my eyesight, I can't read to many books.
I just got back from the bookstore.
Were you buying more books for summer?
No, I was returning all the books I had already bought. I lost my eyesight recently and can't read anymore.
Oh, no! I'm so sorry to hear that.
I can't believe it.
Did something happen?
My book is going to be published.
Are you kidding? The one you wrote like three years ago?
Yes! Finally someone is going to publish it, I don't even have words.
That's so amazing!
My book is going to hit the shelves next month
You finally got it published
yes, after such a hard time its going to print
that's awesome
thank you so much,  it was worth the struggle
I expect a sign copy as soon as it drops.
Hey Quinn, I'm trying to get to my meeting now.
Oh yes, do you know if it is starting soon?
Yes, it's starting at 2pm today.
Oh, let me check what time it is on my watch, it is 10 to 2.
I really need to hurry up, not much time left.
Okay, let me know if you need me to finish the paperwork for you.
Quinn, is it really eight already? That's what your watch says.
Yeah, 8:05 actually.
Oh no, I am so late! My boss is going to be upset.
That's what you get for getting frisky in the morning.
I know but I was so tired this morning.
you should stop working so late.
I really hope I will pass this test, I studied really hard on this time
I am sure you will do okay, you always do so well on tests
yes, I would just be disappointed though if I fail
I woudn't worry about it and just try your best
I might fail my class.
How do you know?
My teacher said that if I don't get a 90% on the test I will not pass.
Have you been studying?
Yes, I studied all week.
I am sure you will do great.
I'm not going to get a 90
why not
because I'm going to get a 100
you think
yes, when our teacher said I wasn't going to pass unless I got a 90, I studied all week
good move, I'm not sure how ill do
I needed a payday loan for the first time.
Make sure those sharks don't cheat you.
I really needed the cash quick.
Why didn't you just use your credit card?
I needed more than my cash advance limit.
Be very careful and pay them back exactly and promptly.
I took out a payday loan today. I don't think I'll do that again.
Why did you do it?
I needed fast cash and there was no other way but the interest is way too high.
It's like loan sharks.
Seriously, if it was not for an emergency, I would never do it.
Yes, in case of emergency I can see why you'd do that.
I'm nervous about going to college.
Was today your first day?
Yes, and I was really paying attention.
You must have been nervous.
You bet.  I wrote down every detail the professor said.
I'm sure your notes are going to help you get an A.
This is a hard class.
The professor is good.
Very detail oriented which I like.
Did you guys get work already?
Yep, first day and got work.
Sounds like the same old Johnson.
I really want to do well this semester in my classes.
I understand, last semester you didn't do that great.
This time I make sure to take lots of notes and really pay attention to all the details.
That is a good plan. I bet it works out better for you this time.
I hope so. I really don't want to let myself down, again.
You are already off to a better start than last semester. Don't beat yourself up for past mistakes!
It was my first day today. I took so many notes.
You always pay extra attention on the first day.
Right. I paid attention to every detail.
That really must have been a lot of note taking
I don't want to miss anyting.
Well you won't have trouble learning!
So have you applied for a job, yet?
I'm working on it, these things take time.
If you need help, please let me know.
Yeah, I will do, thank you.
I think I have one in mind. I'm going to get you applied to it.
Wait, seriously? Well this should be interesting.
Ok, here is the application form. You can put me as a reference.
Cool, thank you! I hope they call me for an interview.
They will for sure as long as you include my name!
Do you really like working there?
I do! The hours and pay are good and it will especially be fun if we both work there.
Ok, I'm going to fill out the application now.
Notice anything new about the house?
It's been completed cleaned! And it was so dirty. yesterday.
Yes, I helped my mom clean everything up.
Didn't you have a really long day at work?
I worked overtime. But my mom was really stressed about the mess and I wanted to help her.
hello everyone, all ready for a game?
yes sire, all geared up
Looks like a fine day for this game
We need to split into teams?
Yes, we have prepared a list of teams
This looks amazing, who wants to be the referee for the first game?.
Jordan has been such a help around here.
What's he been doing?
He's been doing all the cooking and having dinner ready for me when I get home.
That's nice. Are you working a lot now?
Yes, I have a new job and I've had to work some long hours.
I have been working long hours at my new job.
Why? Do you need some cash Tracy?
No, I just want to work really hard now, since Jordan is the one doing all the cooking now.
That's nice, since you can really focus on your job now,  thanks to Jordan.
Yes, and his cooking is good too.
Just don't over work yourself Tracy.
Hey, Jordan. I'm going to be late again today.
you seemed to be working long hours every day.
I know, but it's just for a little while.
What time do you want me to have dinner ready?
I think 7:00 would be good. I'm so grateful you've started doing all the cooking.
Of course, I'm glad to help any way I can. This is a great opportunity for you.
I've been working such long hours lately.
Is it because of the new job?
I think so.
I don't mind doing all the cooking because of you working long hours.
Aww thank you Jordan, that is so sweet!
Thank you for this purse. I'm sure it will look great in my closet
Oh I'm glad you like it! I figured you would
you know me too well
You do use a purse right?
Well I generally prefer a wallet but it might be fun to try
Yes I'm sure you'll like it once you try it
Have you ever thought about getting a pet?
Not really, I can barely keep up with myself, let alone a pet.
I totally fell in love with my neighbor's pets and I have been inspired.
Well I can understand that. Do you want a cat or dog?
Honestly I was thinking about getting some birds.
I see, any type of bird?
I am an only child.
I know you are.
I wish I could have some pets.
Won't your mom allow pets in the house.
No, but the neighbors have pets and I really love their pets.
Can you play with them?.
Thanks Skylar for adding me to your netflix
No worries, I barely use it
Well you know I got you on a free cookie when ever you come into my shop
Chocolate chip?
Ill make a fresh batch when you get there
Thanks, this is so sweet!
What have you been doing lately?
Not much since I'm unemployed at the moment.
Sorry to hear that. Have you been entertaining yourself?
Not much to be honest.
Skylar is going to let you use her Netflix account, as she barely use it.
Oh, thanks. Be sure to thank her for me.
I decided to give my friend Skylar's Netflix account password so they did not have to pay.
Does Skylar know you gave the account info to someone?
No, I figured that she would be ok with it.
I know that she probably would not mind, but you need to ask her.
I guess I should, it is her account after all.
Yes, and then can you give me her info as well if she is ok with it?
I wish I could recall a message.
Did you read it afterwards and feel instant regret?
I did. It was full of errors, I sent it too quickly.
Was this an important message?
No, but I sent it the morning after people were joking about how bad my hangover would be.
Yeah, it does make you look still drunk.
Ugh, I'm so bad at texting.
Don't know what to say?
No it's not that. I just have fat fingers that press all the wrong buttons.
Don't you have auto correct?
That doesn't work either because I never want to say what they think I'm trying to say. I miss phone calls.
Well you can still do that.
Okay, just sent the message to John.
Great, what did it say?
Now that you're asking me to read it, I realized I sent it with a ton of typos.
Oh no, can he still understand it do you think?
I sure hope so!
I saw the buffet on the counter and just dug in, because I was starving!
Well, that figures. You didn't get to the party until late.
Yeah, I had to work until closing that night.
Did you try the fried chicken and the egg rolls?
Yes, I had some of both. As well as the chocolate cake.
Oh, I made that, how did you like it?
I was starving, it was so late when I got in.
Did you eat?
Hell yeah I did, ate so much that I couldn’t sleep.
Next time let me know, I'm in a foodie mood.
I am so stuffed from all that food I ate.
Do you think you could have saved some for me?
I thought you were getting your own food.
You told me you were making food so I didn't.
I had not eaten all day and I needed to fill myself up.
Fine, I guess I will go back out and get more food.
I feel so full and bloated!
Why are you eating so late?
I am famished! I didn't have breakfast or lunch today.
That's not healthy to skip meals.
Not at all! But I was too busy earlier working on a project for work.
Don't eat anymore, you might explode.
You don't have to call me a pig.
You have food all over your face.
I filled my face with food because I was starving.
It is almost bedtime.
I know it is already late evening, I have to fill a hole in my stomach.
You are going to have heartburn in about fifteen minutes.
Honestly, everyone in the office was getting too preoccupied with the storm coming.
My office is the same. What's up? People need to calm down, for God's sake.
I know, it's annoying. I need people to focus when they're at work, I had them start the next sales contest to keep them focused.
That was a great idea. It's hard to keep people focused sometimes.
Yes. Adults are just like kids sometimes.
Especially when there's a snow storm coming!
We really needed to get some work done but that damn storm took everyone's attention.
How can you not worry? I hear our area is on red alert now.
Well, maybe doing some work might distract you from what's going to happen outside.
Austin, you don't want to be the mean boss. Try and understand their perspective..
I figure working will keep everyone from worrying about the storm. You're not changing my mind
Ugh, ok then. You're so stubborn.
I'm really concerned about the storm headed our way. I haven't wanted to say anything but it's scary.
Yeah, I think I have everything battened down. I've rechecked everything 10 times.
Me too. I had everyone helping out to keep their mind off everything else. They seemed to enjoy the work.
That's probably a really good idea. They might feel like they have a little control.
That's what I was hoping. I just hope the storm mellows out before it hits land.
I want to marry someone someday who loves me as much as I love them.
I think everyone has that dream or goal in life.
I have thought about this a lot and that is probably why I am so picky with my dates.
Maybe the key is not being so picky. Maybe you need to open up a little.
I think you could be right because I might have rejected someone too soon that was right for me in the past.
There is always that special person out there for everyone, I truly believe that.
I've dreamt of this moment for a long time.
You're such a sweetheart Quinn.
I just don't see the point in having meaningless relationships, marriage is what I'm after.
What qualities does the perfect woman have to have?
I dreamt I'd meet someone as kind and considerate as my mom.
Since your mom is great I guess I can say you will find a perfect woman.
I promised that I wouldn't tell anyone what she said.
Well what did she say?
I can't tell you! I crossed my heart and hoped to die. I can't betray her trust.
I understand. I was joking, it is good you are so loyal.
I just wouldn't want someone to betray me.
Me neither. You are a good friend.
She's calling again, urgh, I can't deal with her.
Tracy?
Yeah, she thinks I want to talk to her after what she did.
Yeah I saw that, she definitely tripped you on purpose during that game.
She wonders why no one wants to play soccer with her too.
I know, I wish she would stop hanging around here
Tracy tripped me in the soccer match, I hurt my ankle.
That's uncalled for, did you call her?
No but she has been calling me and I'm ignoring it
Yeah you need to cool off
I feel sad, I trusted Tracey
She gets competitive
We made breakfast in bed for my mother 's birthday. Then she told us her birthday was on the 5th, not the 3rd.
Oh wow. Were you guys embarrassed?
Yeah, I can't believe we got it wrong. We gave her the food and gifts anyway.
You should write it down on a calendar.
Yeah, I'm going to put it in my cell phone calendar.
I've never had a dog before, but I picked up a cute one at the pound.
That's Bailey, the one I showed you on the web.
Well, that was Bailey; she's now Kit.
What was wrong with Bailey?
I had a girlfriend named Bailey and lets just say it would be all bad to leave my dog named Bailey.
I see, makes sense.
So are you excited to put together this party?
I sure am! I have been waiting all month!
Robin will have no idea it is coming.
I know! Robin seems so preoccupied with other things going on at school right now. We should be good!
It sure is going to make planning for the party so much easier!
Well, what are we waiting for?!
I can't believe we pulled it off. I was so afraid my friends were going to spill the beans.
It's not easy organizing a surprise party. How did you keep it a secret?
I just made sure all my friends knew not to say a word to Robin.
It's good that you prepared. Didn't they all walk to school together this morning?
Yup. So I'm so glad that I made a point of saying something beforehand.
That's great. Robin's lucky to have a friend like you.
Everything on the menu looked so delicious
Hmm, I know. I usually get the Cobb Salad with lemon water and some breadsticks.
I had a healthy salad, the only exception, it was with a small soda.
Hey, I thought you were on a diet? You shouldn't drink soda!
I know, but it has been going so well, I deserved a little treat!
That's true, I guess it keeps you going strong.
I've been sticking to my diet really well.
How long have you been dieting?
I started dieting one month ago.
What did you avoid?
I avoided sugary food and drinks as well as soda. However, I am going to drink a small soda bottle now to celebrate my success with my diet.
That should work. One drink is not going to make a huge difference with the progress you've made.
I've been doing so well on my diet, but I drank a soda today.
If the only thing you did was drink one soda, that isn't too bad.
I know, but I'd rather I could stay on my diet without cheating at all.
Most people can't do that. You don't want to always feel deprived.
I know. That's what makes it so hard, you just want what you can't have.
That's why a little cheating is good. It doesn't really hurt the diet, but you're not constantly thinking about what you can't have.
I feel so happy my woodworking is making such a difference in the community.
I know you're really talented. What are you working on?
Well, I've been working on a bunch of things including baby cribs for the poor in our community.
Sounds like you are doing a lot of good for others.
It feels good, because a lot of those younger Moms really need the help.
Exactly. I bet they really appreciate it!
I just got done building baby cribs for the poor people in our area.
That's really nice that you do charity work like that.
Thanks. I've always liked the idea of giving back to the community.
I've always admired people that do volunteer work.
I've always liked helping people, so I thought this was a good way to do that, and do something I enjoy all at the same time.
It's great that you have a hobby like that, that you can put to good use.
I've been working overtime trying to make these cribs for the less fortunate mums of the neighbourhood.
I'm sure they will greatly appreciate you making these.
I know they've been working hard. I'm just glad I can provide something free of charge for all these families
From what I've seen, they also look amazing.
I really like this new school. I'm going to try to get As here to get into a good college.
I'm glad that you like it better than the old one. Is it the teachers or the students who are better?
Everything is better. The teachers teach well and the kids want to learn.
I hope everything continues to work out. I know you will do well .
I knew I'd like school once I started it.
You like where you are going?
Yes. I am working pretty hard to do well. I think I'll be on honours this year.
That's great you have both good grades and happy school time.
It is. I think I'll really like high school in general.
Keep up the good work like that and you will!
Check this ball out, it is super bouncy!
Oh wow that is bouncy, you probably shouldn't be using it inside the house.
Damn right I shouldn't, I hit the vase with the ball and it broke.
Yep it sure is, you're going to get in a lot of trouble.
I've glued it back together, real quick.
You better hope that works! That was an expensive vase
Okay, I'll admit that my house isn't the best place to practice for quarterback trials.
Did you at least practice in the garden?
No, me and my friend were messing around inside and I broke the vase on the side.
Oh no! You broke that nice vase.
Yeah, thankfully my craftmanship skills meant I could glue it back together. Looks like new!
If you say so.
That's the last time I'm ever messing around with a ball inside the house.
That's a disaster waiting to happen, you should know better.
At least give me some credit. The vase I broke I managed to glue back together piece by piece.
Good.
Ash is really irresponsible with money, this is the last time I'm supporting him.
Yeah but the guy lost his job, have some sympathy.
But the he spent it all on gambling! That's not the way to bounce back.
I didn't know about that, kind of sad to think about it.
He's a good friend and don't want to see him in that state.
I'm sure good karma will come your way.
The guy had so many bills to pay, I just lent him a helping hand.
Well this lockdown has been killing his business.
I know, things are just so difficult right now.
I gave him a couple thousands of dollars, he will repay me once he's all up and running again.
With interest?
No! I'm not a loan shark...
Ash is struggling in New York, since Broadway closed.
So sad that people haven't been supporting the theatres.
I had to send him so money so he could pay his rent
You're a kind sister. He is lucky to have you.
Last night, something strange happened to me.
What happened?
During the snow storm, I heard a knock on my door.
Really? That sounds frightening. Did you check who was it?
No, I was too scared to open the door.
No kidding. I would've been scared too.
Sasha seemed sad today.
I noticed she hasn't been herself since she started that new diet.
I wanted to have some fun with her today and took her to the movies.
How did that go?
When I was sitting next to her in the theatre, I saw her eyeing my candy. I ran out and got her some. Her mood changed then she was happy.
That proves my point about her dieting.
I thought Kendall was never going to show up last night.
I don't even consider her late anymore until an hour has passed.
I couldn't even call her and complain since it was a surprise party.
What did you do when she finally got there?
As soon as I saw her walking up the driveway, I yelled to everyone in the room that she had finally arrived.
I bet she felt guilty when you all started singing Happy Birthday.
The birthday girl, Kendall, arrived a little late.
Well, on her birthday I think she's entitled.
I know, she kept us all on our toes as we never knew when she was arriving.
Eventually she made it though, and that's what matters!
Exactly! We had food and drink and danced all night.
That's the way to do it.
I'm so glad Kai is around.
What's Kai doing today?
He said he's doing something fun with my kids, yesterday he took them to the park.
He seem to be quite immature, just like a kid. Perfectly suited.
He does, it gives me some time off.
That sounds fun for you.
Kai took my kids to the park yesterday and they had such an amazing time.  They are planning on doing something fun like that today.
Kai is so good with the kids.  She babysat for me one time.
She's so kind and patient. All the kids love her.
She's got the best heart.  It fits her to go into child development.
That's right.  She's studying child psychology at college.
She told me about that last time we met up.
Kai is an amazing sitter and the kids really enjoy being with her.
What fun things does she do?
She took the kids to the park yesterday and they really enjoyed that.
So, she is worth the money you pay her?
Definitely. She is already trying to figure out what to do with them tomorrow.
Wow, give me her number. I may need a sitter soon.
So Kai took my kids to the park.
He always comes up with fun things to do.
Yeah. He is planning something fun for tomorrow.
What does he have planned?
I don't know. But it involves ice cream.
Hey, I'm free tomorrow.
I was just poking fun at my brother Austin when he decided to just hit me in the face.
Wow, why did he do that?
He said he is tired of me picking on him all the time.
You do tend to not let up on the kid sometimes.
I'm not trying to hurt his feelings, I am just doing what big brothers do.
I get it, but he was obviously really upset at you.
Me and Quinn were together for a long time.
How long does it take you to get over the break up?
It didn't take as long as you think it would.
Really? I'm surprised about that.
In the end you have to Move on, but it doesn't mean that you forget about the person or miss certain things about them.
OK, I get it now.
Do you realize it's already been three years since Quinn and I broke up?
Three years, really? It doesn't seem like that long ago.
I know. After all the time we were together, it still feels weird being apart.
I'm not surprised. It's hard to get used to not having that connection.
I miss it. Who knows if I'll ever meet someone like that again.
Well, the nice thing is that you're free to explore all the possibilities.
I had to keep Kai's store open and run things while he was gone.
He clearly must trust you a lot.
Yeah, I'm trying to get a promotion so this will be a good chance to prove my worth.
Don't disappoint him then. Why did he leave anyway?
He was going on vacation for a week.
The good mood factor might play a role in your promotion then!
Yeah, I opened Kai's store just for the week they were gone.
Was it difficult?
No, not really. I've been working part time for a few years.
I bet he's really happy that you were able to keep it open.
He sure was, especially since I made a couple of really big sales.
That's great. Maybe a business is in your future.
My car ran out of gas the other day on my way over the mountains.
Wow, that sounds miserable.
It was, and I had to walk 10 miles to the nearest gas station.
Did you still end up delivering the goods in time?
I barely did, I carried them in my suitcase the whole time since I couldn't risk losing them.
Good idea, our boss wouldn't be very happy if you'd lost them.
I was driving to my parents and my car broke down about a mile from their house.
What did you do?
I walked.  Normally this wouldn't have been so bad, except I had my suitcase and it was really heavy.
Why didn't you just call your parents to come get you?
I tried but they didn't answer.  It was only about a mile, so it would have been fine if it weren't for my suitcase.
My car broke down, but my suitcase was inside.
That really sucks.
I had to carry it far. My arm was about to snap.
How heavy?
100 pounds.
Defying odds.
I've had a really bad day. My car broke down about a mile from home. I had to carry my suitcase home.
That's too bad. I bet it was really heavy.
It was. My back is killing me from lugging it so far. And I had such a nice trip. I wish it hadn't ended this way.
Do you need a lift back to your car?
No thanks. I called AAA, and they are going to tow my car to the repair shop.
Hope they get if fixed and you get your car back soon.
Do you know what's behind the curtain?
I have no idea.
I've been peeking at it throughout the whole day and I couldn't wait to tell someone! There's a box of magic tricks behind the curtain.
Someone was hiding magic tricks?
Someone must've bought some magic stuff last week.
I developed this new paining to show off at the gala.
What is the painting about?
Its just a post-modern piece that I painted.
I can't wait to see it and the rest of your paintings.
I think the show is going to be great. Can't wait for you guys to come.
I'm definitely there and will be cheering you on.
I've been trying to reach Austin. He finally replied after a couple of days.
I just saw him outside.
Yeah, he must have been ill or something.
Well it's a good thing he finally has replied.
He's one busy person.
I am sure he will always have time for you.
I wanted to schedule a meeting with Austin.  He got back to me and said he can meet up tomorrow.
What's the meeting about?
Austin is my partner for the project we are doing for our Biology class.  We have to research some animal and make a presentation in front of the class.
I love group projects.  Austin is a good person to be paired up with, he is so conscientious.
He's very engaged in class, the teacher loves him. He's so smart.
You guys will have a great presentation.
I'm glad I was finally able to set up that meeting with Austin.
Austin is very busy. Was it hard to find a time to meet with him?
Yes, it was very hard. But after a few days he finally got back to me.
That's great, are you prepared for the meeting?
Yes, I think so. But I am still a little nervous.
Don't be nervous, I'm sure you will do fine.
I've always wanted to see Broadway; while I was in New York for business, I saw a Broadway show.
What did you see?
I saw A Street Car Named Desire.
I've never heard of that show. How was it?
It was good. The cast was great.
Another thing you can cross off your bucket list.
I was blown away by the Broadway show I saw last night.
What inspired you to see a show on a Monday night?
I figured I'm only in New York City for three days, so I might as well make the most of my time.
Did the show have any famous actors or actresses?
I didn't have very good seats so I couldn't really see anyone's faces well enough to be able to tell.
Well, that's still such a unique experience you got to have.
I was busy all this weekend putting up flyers for my yard sale.
That's cool. What are you trying to raise money for?
I want to give the kids a really good Christmas this year.
That's a great goal. I'll be sure to stop by when you're open.
It's going to be from 9 AM to 8 PM this Saturday.
I'll see you then and I'll be sure to bring some cash.
I'm good to go on the yard sale for this weekend.
Expecting a lot of people?
Yeah. I posted flyers all over the neighbourhood.
That's a great idea. You need traffic!
Yes. I'm trying to raise money for the holidays!
Sounds like you're on the right track for sure.
I am going to have a yard sale next weekend.
Do you need some help with setting up everything for the sale?
No it's all good thanks. I've already made and posted flyers all around the neighbourhood.
But I would love to help you, you are going to make so much money for Christmas.
I really hope we make a lot of money during our yard sale this weekend.
What are you guys raising money for?
We are trying to raise money for the holidays.
That's great, do you think a lot of people will show up?
I hope so, we made a lot of flyers and put them up all over the neighbourhood.
I'm sure the attendance will be amazing then.
Hey I'm having a yard sale, did you see my flyer?
Yeah I did, but Remy, I've got to be honest. It didn't really catch my attention.
That's not what I wanted to hear. I'm trying to earn some money since the holidays are coming up.
Oh, yeah holidays can be tough. I can put a word out and tell my friends?
If you don't mind that would be great! The more the better..
Sure, hopefully people will show up.
Remember the picture I took of Tracy when we saw the Statue of Liberty?
Yeah, I actually really liked that picture.
I'm glad you like it because I printed a copy and got it framed for her!
That's so sweet of you! She will love that!
I wanted to do something nice for her since she helped me study for that test.
The picture will be a nice surprise!
Tracy and I visited a national landmark.
Where did you go?
We went to Grant's Tomb.
You went all the way to New York?
We did. To prove it I took a picture of Tracy in front of the Tomb.
That is proof enough for me.
I really appreciate Aubrey for getting me a job. I was walking on a tight rope.
What are you going to be doing?
I'm going to start off as a delivery driver and see whether I can move my way up.
Good luck to you.
I just got a job. Aubrey found me one. I really needed the money.
That is wonderful news. What job is it ?
I will be working at the grocery store on Main Street. Working in the warehouse at the back overnight.
It's a start anyway. Are you able to stay up all night?
Yeah, I'm a might owl so this job is perfect for me.
Aubrey got me a job.
Are you working for his company?
Indeed. I cannot wait to start, I needed something to do.
That's awesome! Congratulations!
We put our fingers on the door, and then we ran four our lives!
Who's the second person?
A friend of mine.
Was it for a ding dong ditch prank?
Yes it was.
You guys will get caught eventually!
I was overwhelmed with trash inside and around my home.
What did you do?
I called Casey to bring his truck to my home.
He is a good person and I'm sure he was helpful.
He is a friend and I was relieved when he came to take away the trash.
You are fortunate to have such a friend.
Honestly, if you don't have a friend like Casey in your life, you need one.
I know, she's always doing favours and never asking for anything in return.
This time she came around and picked up all my trash for me.
Yeah, you better buy her a drink or two.
Casey threw away my trash for me when I was sick.  He came over and helped me tidy up the place.
Casey is such a nice friend.
He bought me chicken soup from the diner on Main Street.
You mean that old family joint?
They have the best chicken noodle soup in town.
I'll remember that next time I am in the neighbourhood.
This year was so stressful, I almost dropped out of school.
But you stayed, and you graduated!  That's awesome.
Thanks.  It took a lot of work, but I pulled it off.
I'm really impressed.  You did have a tough year.
I'm just glad I was able to focus and finish.  I'm so glad to be done.
I'm proud of you!
I have officially graduated, Steve! I am a proud owner of a Bachelor's Degree!
Way to go, Sydney! Way to go! I am so happy for you, especially all that you had to endure with your divorce and the death of your mom.
Thank you, Steve, I appreciate it. I'm happy too. My mom would have loved to see me graduate.
Yes, she would have. You're the first person in your family to be a college graduate.
Well, I'm sure she's watching me from up above. Mom, this one's for you.
I'm sure she is, too. Now hang that degree on your wall and let's party!
I spent all night trying to fix that sink myself.
Did you get it to go down?
No, I am going to have to call a plumber.
I can give you the number of the guy that I use. He is cheap and gets it done quick.
Yeah, give me the number.
That way you don't drive yourself crazy trying to fix something, he can do in 20 minutes and he has the tools you don't.
I think plumbers are underpaid and overworked...
Why do you say that?
I tried to fix the sink in the bathroom yesterday and I thought it would be simple, but it took me 9 hours and 400 dollars worth of parts because I kept messing up.
Really?  You should have called me.  I do that kind of work.
I thought I could do it.  It looks like something so easy to work on but now I regret it.
Next time leave the repairs to someone who knows what they're doing.
The pipe under my sink was broken today and I decided to fix it myself.
Did you repair it?
I did but it took me most of the day.
Now you see why plumbers can charge so much money.
Yes, if it happens again, I'll be calling one.
I would too. But it's cool you fixed it yourself at least once.
I'm glad I was able to find my mom just before the contest closed.
So, I'm guessing she let you enter?
Yes, she let me enter the contest
I entered the contest too
I guess we're competing against each other then.
You're my enemy now!
This contest is going to launch me straight to the big time.
Not if you don't get your mother's permission first.
I have! She said I can attend.
What is it that you're doing again?
It's a math television contest, if you win you could get a scholarship to an Ivy league university.
Just make sure you revise enough.
I had some dumb luck.
What happened to you?
I needed my mother's permission to enter a television contest and she was no where to be found.
What did you do?
As I was racing out the door to try and find her she pulled up in a taxi, just before the contest admissions closed.
That is dumb luck.
something strange happened
what is it this time?
A giant ogre entered the fight when we were fighting Alex, they defeated all our soldiers
Just Alex and the Ogre?
Yes it was so powerful we had to look at the doors for an escape route.
This is a terrifying battle, glad you escaped
I think we were overpowered, the giant ogre and Alex every person we sent in to fight.
That giant ogre is a menace, I'm surprised you guys made it out alive.
We left before it was way too late.
What was the exit plan?
We got nervous after everyone was defeated and we looked and found some doors, which provided an escape route.
Probably for the best.
Jan's line was so crowded, I couldn't move.
Yeah, it gets like that. She invites too many people over.
It seemed like a waste of time to wait. I had better things to do here at home.
I hear it always gets crowded at this time of night.
Just arriving home from working.
Hey! Didn't expect to see you so soon.
Yeah, work was crowded on Jan's line and they didn't have anywhere else to put me.
So you just left?
Yeah, I figured I'd just come home and work on the boat instead.
Well, hopefully you don't get in trouble for leaving early.
My mom said that I could stay over, to sleep the night!
Oh, I'm sure you two will have a great time.
I'm preparing my bags right now.
Make sure you're back on time though. Otherwise your mom will be mad at you.
Yeah it's ok, I'm only staying at that place till nine the next morning.
I'll take your word for it.
I've been told I spend too much time sitting in my room watching TV.
Well, you do sit on your behind for upwards of 8 hours a day. That's not good for you.
I know, but I'm depressed a lot. It's hard to get motivation to get up and face the world, so I  just love to watch TV instead. Don't have to deal with the world.
But if you keep doing that, you miss out on a lot too.
I know, you're right. I shouldn't watch so much TV, but I do love it. I do need to change.
Well, if you need my help and motivation, Alex, I'm always here for you.
I love sports.
How often do you watch sports?
I watch every chance I get.
To the exclusion of everything else?
I spend most of my time up in my room with sports playing on the tv.
You are one dedicated sports fan.
I got in trouble for having the TV on again at night.
You watch that thing was to much.
What am I supposed to do up in my room? I can't go outside because of the virus.
Why don't you try reading a book?
I'm so happy we won the basketball game yesterday!
That's great! Did you score any points?
Yes, I started sinking a lot of free-throws. I even saw Jordan look at me approvingly.
That must feel really good to be recognized by Jordan!
Yes, his approval definitely means a lot to me.
I can't wait to come to your next game.
I think Jordan's liking all these free throws I've been getting through the hoops.
He probably does, he likes scouting around for talent for his personal team
Personal team? What's all that about?
He has a group that plays once a week on the courts, they play for money.
Oh, if it's hustle he wants, he can look elsewhere. I just play for fun and not for money.
True. If you don't live up to his expectations, he'll slap you around and call you stupid.
I was really scared last night because I felt like I was falling.
You're so nimble, though. How could you fall?
I didn't fall, but it almost happened. I didn't have a good grip on the chair that Alex was sitting on.
How did you keep yourself from hitting the floor?
I just held onto Alex as tightly as I could.
I'm glad you were able to stay on the chair.
Damn, I was leaning back on my chair with Alex and almost fell.
That's why you don't lean back on chairs.
I know! It was like a near death experience and that's the last time I'm doing it.
Sounds nasty, how did you not fall?
Well thankfully Alex was there, so I held on to him as hard as I could!
Good save.
Damn that was close.
Sure was.
I'm happy Alex was there I grabbed him so fast and held on.
I see that you are a lucky talking cat.
That's funny.
We had so much fun in the food fight.  We just threw food around the whole cafeteria.
You guys turned the place upside down.
We were protesting the treatment of the freshman girls by the senior guys so we all threw food at them.
They were so angry.
They had it coming and we don't care if we got in trouble.
The school had to bring in security guards to put an end to the chaos.
I gave it my all in the marathon.
How long did you run?
It was a two-mile race.
That's long distance running.
I kept my usual stride, and when I sped up close to the end, I caught the dust from the other racers.
That's too bad. I hope you have better luck next time.
I gave it my absolute all in the race, but that clearly wasn't enough!
Was that the one you just did?
Yeah, I was so close to catching the racers. I was in front of them, until they pulled this stop and drift left technique that I've never seen before.
Dang, where'd it happen?
It was literally the last lap. I was left catching dust!
Losing to someone that good isn't something to feel bad about!
I've really been there for Lee recently, he's been feeling down.
What's up with him now?
He's been fired from his job, was a disaster waiting to happen.
I heard that he really hasn't been having the best of time there.
He will come back stronger, I know Lee well.
Well that is what friends are for Remy, to encourage and support.
I can't believe I just got married
I'm so happy for you! How are you feeling?
I'm so happy right now. The ceremony was just so beautiful
Yeah I'm really glad I got to see it. You and Skylar were beautiful together
Thanks again for coming. It was so great to have you there and to kiss her on the hand after the ceremony.
Of course! I am so happy for you two
I kissed Skylar's hands after the wedding ceremony.
What was that all about?
On our first date, I was so nervous about kissing her that I kissed her hands instead.
That's really sweet.
Yeah. I thought it would be something special for both of us after our wedding.
I think you two are going to have a wonderful marriage.
I finally joined the high school basketball team today!
That's great news! They can sure use you.
Thanks! I wanted to join right away but I guess my junior year is better than nothing.
Of course it is! The team is better already!
So what afterschool activities are you in?
I am in band as well as track.
Oh okay, I needed to join a sport so I made the basketball team.
You did, on your junior year right?
Yeah, I'm the best three point shooter in the team.
Everyone needs a good point guard.
I finally made it!
Made what?
I finally made the basketball team after trying for two years.
Oh nice what did you do different this time?
I just practiced all summer and I grew a little too. Junior year is going to be fun!
I'm sure the extra height helped a lot. Well done!
I had an idea at work.
Was it a good idea?
It was a great idea, good enough to share with my boss.
How did he react to your idea?
He gave me the green light to schedule a meeting so that everyone was involved.
That's amazing, let's hope you get the right credit once it blows up.
I was at work today and had a brilliant idea for a project for our company.
Really? Did you tell your boss about it?
Well, I scheduled a meeting with her and the higher ups to discuss potentially putting the idea in motion. Fingers crossed.
I'm sure it will be great! You and your boss really get along with each other and you're smart, so I think it's a great idea.
Thanks! I think so too! I will let you know how it turns out!
I can't wait!
I bought a new record player!
Do you enjoy using the new record player?
Yes! I put on my favourite record and moved the needle to my favourite track.
You must really enjoy the record player.
Yes! A dream come true.
Hey check out the new record player that I bought!
Oh wow, I didn't know you were into records.
I just got into it and check out my new favourite track. Been playing it all day.
That's a good jam from the 60s!
Yeah I love the old Motown classics, especially on vinyl.
This is a lot of fun and the record player is a cool nostalgic item.
I'm getting better at playing individual tracks on my new record player.
Oh that's good. Yeah it's hard to put the needle on the right spot.
It is, but with practice it's doable. I can't stop listening to I'm Waiting For The Man at the moment.
By the Velvet Underground? That's such a great record I don't know why you don't just listen to the whole thing.
I know, but I really love that song.
I think I'll come over and listen with you.
I prefer hearing music on record players.
You have a wonderful collection of records, no wonder.
I bought a new record player.
I would love to hear it.
I will put on my favourite record and move the needle to my favourite track. As I always do.
Let's get started playing music.
There is a new record player I bought and I love the needle a lot.
Yeah, I can totally tell. A good needle makes all the difference.
There is a great track I've been playing on this record.
I know. I can listen to this album many times though for hours on end. We have similar taste, Remy.
Yeah its such a great album. I always move my needle to this specific track though.
Ah yes, that one!
Hey friend, how are you?
I am well, how are you?
I am well too, you know my car broke right?
Okay, what happened?
I got ready to go to the office and then realized that it no longer starts.
Okay, did you get a chance to repair it?
My car wouldn't start this morning.  I was all ready to go to work.
What did you do?
I took a personal day so that I can have it towed to my mechanic.
Is it fixed now?
My mechanic fixed it by the end of the day.  He said he replaced a part in it.
Hope it didn't cost too much.
Wow, so I was up so early for work today.
That's awesome that you are showing your dedication.
But the problem was that my car wouldn't start at all.
Oh, that's terrible on a day like this.
Yeah, so I took the bus into work but now I have a major car problem to think about.
I'm sorry to hear that and hope it gets fixed without too much trouble.
Hey, can you give me a ride to work this morning?
Sure, is something wrong with your car?
I rushed to get ready for work and the car won't start
Oh no, you need to take it to the shop
I will, after work, can you be here soon?
On my way.
I just woke up an hour ago and I'm already having the worst day.
What happened?
I got ready for work, went out to my car, and it wouldn't start.
It's probably just the starter. If you need a ride to work I can come give you a ride.
I hope it's something that simple. I don't need a ride, I already have one. Thank you though.
No problem! I hope your day gets better.
I think the feds are following me.
Why would the feds want to follow you?
Well I never told you this, but I do some shady things for money. I'm kind of a con.
Yikes, I had no idea! Should I be worried about my own money?
No, I only go after old people. I trick them into investing all their money in my company, which doesn't really exist.
That's the worst thing I've ever heard! I hope the feds catch you.
I conned this other old man the other day.
What racket works nowadays?
I told him I was a prince who needed to transfer money. He gave me money from his life savings.
Is that your go-to scheme?
Honestly, some folks are so far gone, any lie will work.
If only it were as easy to lie out of getting caught.
Remember how last weekend I was going to go base jumping with a couple of guys from the gym.
I see you are still alive so I assume you didn't.
Yeah, I was talking to a friend who is a professional sky diving instructor and he advised against it.
I am not surprised, seemed crazy to me when you said it.
Yeah, he said with out the proper training and because I've never done it, I lacked the expertise to not kill myself. I didn't go.
I am glad you thought about it, I was pretty certain I was going to come in today to find out you were dead or in the hospital.
I've never been skydiving.  Some professional told me that without proper training, I would fail. I decided to cancel my plans.
Skydiving looks dangerous.
It also looks thrilling.
I am sure it's an adrenaline rush.
I've seen videos of people skydiving and it just looks like something I want to do.
You can get some training and then try it.
I couldn't believe when Aubrey held a knife to me and took my money when I was alone.
I would never have expected him to do that. Did you call the police?
You bet I did. I don't know what he was thinking.
I heard he was having some financial problems, do you think maybe that was it?
Well, he did seem on edge, but that certainly might have been why he wanted my money.
That had to be scary. I'm just glad you're okay.
I can't believe how good the furniture looks.
It looks like it was made for this room.
It does, I was a little scared it wouldn't fit.
It fits perfect.
It does, it looks fantastic in here.
You definitely bought the right furniture.
I called everyone into the room to make an announcement.
But you didn't make an announcement did you?
No, I filled it with a poisonous gas instead
Wow, this company treats its employees so well.
They didn't really have a choice, the police were closing in.
Sounds like they deserve it.
We have to go through this door first, you guys go ahead I have to get the bag.
I am so not feeling this house, let's get out of here.
We just have to stay till morning! Damn, I have to pee, be right back.
Let us out! What the hell! What is the smoke?
There can only be one winner!
I have a good plan to take care of these people once and for all
What are you going to do with them
I'm going to secretly call them into this room and when they're not looking I will fill it with poison that they can't see
I don't think they will ever find out what you're doing too
I was finally able to kill off my neighbors.
How did you pull that off?
I invited them into my living room, and when the front door closed, it locked behind them. Then I filled the whole room with poison.
That's a pretty nightmarish plot.
I know. I don't feel an ounce of guilt.
That's messed up. You need to see a therapist.
I had to take advanced Portuguese class two times so I would be ready while in Brazil.
Why did you take it two times?
That advanced class moved so fast and I just didn't feel ready.
Did you pass the class?
I was just auditing it, so no grade. It was just about my comfort.
So do you feel ready to speak Portuguese primarily?
I'm going to Brazil for two years.
Time to study up on the language!
Yeah I'm going to learn with an app.
Two years is a long time
I'm a little excited though.
I hope you have a great time.
I'm starting to take some Portuguese classes.
Aren't you moving to Brazil for two years?
Hence the reason I'm taking these classes.
Maybe I should sign up with you.
There still room if you want to.
Send me the link that you used.
I finally got some good news about my job hunt!
Really? What is that?
Well I met this job recruiter and they helped me fill out an application for a job.
I hope you get it because I know how long you have been searching.
I hope so too. I am really tired of applying for jobs. She's called Kendall and has tons of experience apparently.
If the recruiter wanted to help you fill it out that is a good sign!
I will not skip class, guys.
You are a good, well behaved boy for your age.
I don't want to be rebellious, that's all.
Try living out freely will you?
I am. I just want to go to school.
Okay. Do it your way then.
Cameron is hard to talk to sometimes.
Aw, what makes you say that?
I had to be pretty blunt with him earlier for him to take me seriously. We've been having problems at work and I've only just found the cause.
Darn, has it make things tense between you two?
A little bit ,if it continues I'll have to sit him down.
I hope it stops before then, let me know what happens tomorrow.
I'm so glad I went to summer camp with Sydney.
That's super cool!
Also I found out Sydney is going to the same school as us!
That's nice, I can't wait to get to know her too.
Yeah, we have been hanging out more.  You should hang out with us too.
Let me know next time!
I've really been missing Sydney these past few months.
I thought you two were joined at the hip!
We were over the summer, but once school started, she kind of stopped talking to me.
Have you tried sending her a text or something?
Yes, a couple of times, our association is starting to get better.
Maybe I can talk to her and see what's going on.
I have bad news, the cops picked me up because they found my ID when I ran away.
You aren't going to say that I was there stealing stuff too are you?
No way man I would never rat you out.
That is good because I can't go to jail.
I won't get that much time if anything because I never got in trouble before.
I hope so because we did steal a bunch of food from the store.
I was so embarrassed when the cops came by.
I can imagine. You should've picked up your ID card.
I know, but I didn't know that I dropped it.
It's fine then. You just made a mistake.
Mom is finished eating and she has to leave to make it to work on time.
Aww, man.  I was having fun, weren't you?  I wanted to stay and play some games and get something else to eat.
If you want I can see if it's ok with mom if we stay, and we can get a taxi to take us home later.
Cool!  I would like to do that.  I'll even pay for the next French fries!
Okay, let me go check with my mom.  I'll buy the next pizza if you're for sure going to pay for the fries.
No problem.  I hope she will let us stay a little longer.
I never wanted to leave, I just wanted to stay there and stuff my face with food.
Were you guys over downtown?
Yeah, my mom came too so really it was up to her.
She's the boss after all.
Yeah, I checked with her if we could have stayed a little longer but no luck.
Unlucky.
Man, I love the food in that place. I always have a second round.
Yes, that is an awesome place.
I called my mom and asked if I could stay another two days.
Great, she better say yes!
I need to buy some more food if I stay.
Well, get your mom's okay and I'll go to the store with you.
I didn't want to leave yet, so I called my mom and asked her if I could stay and buy more food.
Where were you?
My friends and I went to the amusement park yesterday
I heard it was packed.
It was.  I was with my friends, talking and having fun.  I didn't even mind the lines.
When are you going back?
Remember the other night when we went drinking at that bar downtown? Well this guy named Carson was checking me out.
Wow, that's really crazy! So what even happened with that?
Well, after flirting with our eyes from across the bar, he worked up the courage to come over and talk to me. I ended up giving him my number!
I'm so glad that you met someone! Have you planned a date to get to know him better?
Yes, actually. I'm supposed to have dinner with him tomorrow at the Italian place down the street. I'm very excited.
I hope that everything goes well for you, Aubrey. It's about time you put yourself back out there.
I saw Carson staring at me from across the room.
Where were you guys?
We were at the bar.
It must have been love at first sight.
Maybe so. He stared at me the whole time.
Does he stand a chance?
I was really proud of my performance tonight as the lead in the ballet!
You did so good! You should be proud.
Thanks! I couldn't believe it when I got the lead, and I was so nervous about tonight.
I knew you were going to get it. No one else around here dances like you.
You're too kind. I know a lot of great dancers, but I worked my but off on tonight's show.
It shows! Everyone I heard after the show was really impressed.
For my first lead role I did a pretty good job.
The reviews are amazing on you Casey.
I was pleasantly surprised at the great reviews.
You're very talented, so it's not surprising
Thank you for the kind words.
You're very welcome, my talented friend.
The dance truly came together.
I was impressed with you style and grace.
Getting the lead ballet role has always been my dream.
You worked hard and got it.
I really was able to pull one over on the car salesman. I just twisted his words and ended up getting the deal I wanted.
That's great. Buying a car is a tricky thing to do .
Yes, but I am able to talk my way into getting anything.  I even got 0% interest.
Isn't that what they were advertising?
Yes, but he tried to give me 5%.
I reworded the deal to try to get people to buy the car.
Did the rewrite increase sales?
I think so, since the sales have been optimal this month.
What was the chief change you think that did the trick?
I had a table that prioritized yearly APR and how many months before you're paid off.
I think that would help people make decisions better.
I've somehow managed to get an even lower grade in math this year.
How is that possible? You had a D last year.
Well, this year I got an F. I don't know what I'm doing wrong.
I'll help tutor you for the rest of the year. Let's see if we can't get you up at least one letter grade before the end of the semester.
I'm just really struggling with math.
We all have subjects at school we're not good at.
Yeah, but it seems like I'm getting worse at it, if that's possible.
Well, I can always help you study.
Thanks. I would really like that.
As long as you help me with English, it's a deal.
My mom is going to be so mad, I failed my math test again!
Oh no, did you study?
I did, I always do but it seems like my math skills never improve, in fact they get worse!
I'm not good at math either so I can relate, maybe you need a tutor
I honestly don't think that will help, math is just not my subject
Just do the best you can and carry on
We have worked so hard on this surprise party for our friend.
Does he know about it yet?
There's no way, everyone has been so quiet about it.
Didn't he ask you about your plans this weekend?
Yes he did! I told him I was busy with my school work and couldn't come out.
It sounds like he will be very surprised!
I hope our friend doesn't find out about the party we have planned for him.
I don't think he even knows. Everyone has kept quiet about it, it's just whether someone snitches!
I think he may have heard about it last night, when we were on the telephone.
Maybe not though, because we were being so quiet and talking in code
I really hope not though.
There's nothing worse than going on a hike with someone with long hair.
Well if they're in front of you, I bet their hair was being super annoying.
`Yeah, thankfully I found a headband and pushed Robin's hair back.
Thank God, otherwise you would have had the worst time.
Yikes, I kept getting scraped with these branches sticking out everywhere!
I bet, and tripping over tree stumps I assume
I also noticed that Robin kept getting hair in his mouth. So I pulled it back for him with this headband I had.
I've told him so many times he needs to get a haircut!
He won't listen, it's a lost cause.
Maybe we should cut it in his sleep?
Hi, I just got myself a new hammer from the store
What are you building?
I have to put some shelves in my new garage.
That's a very interesting project. Let me know if you need a hand.
Great! I'm sure I'd call you on it one of these days okay. Thank you.
Call me anytime.
Hey, I just got a hammer while I was at the store.
Oh nice, so you can finally make that birdhouse you've been planning in the garage?
Yeah, I'm excited to do it.
I bet the birds will be happy.
I got Addison a watch for his birthday.
Did he like it? Sounds like a nice gift.
It was expensive and just what he wanted. He made me put it on his wrist immediately.
Sounds like the right choice of a present.
Tracy and I went to get ice cream today.
That sounds like fun. Did you enjoy yourself?
Well, as I paid for the ice cream Tracy held it, and in trying to keep it out of the sun, she dropped it.
That's not great. So you didn't get to have ice cream?
No I still got ice cream. I bought a new cone.
Too bad you had to pay double the price.
I got Tracy to protect my ice cream from the sun, but it was so hot it melted in her hands! She ended up dropping it on the floor.
God, must be some rubbish quality ice cream if it melts that easily.
I don't think it has anything to do with the quality when it's the hottest day of the year.
I beg to differ.
Tracy protected my ice cream from the sun by shielding it with her hand but then dropped the cone on the floor.
Did you have a spoon?
I went back into the store and explained what had happened and the girl gave me another cone.
That's sweet of her.
Ice cream without a cone just isn't the same.
You got me wanting an ice cream cone now.
The sun was too hot for me and Tracy to be eating ice cream.
You do as best as you can in those circumstances, but the cone stands no chance.
That's exactly what happened to Tracy, it just fell right out of her hands.
Poor her, I bet she felt mortified.
I tried not to make her feel too bad. I got a lemonade out it anyway.
They sell them fresh at the grocery store.
I think that Taylor is trying to trick me, that deal seems too good to be true.
Seems a bit fishy to me, what is it for?
She said that I could have the new iPhone for half the retail price.
That can't be true, must be a fake.
Have you ever bought anything from Taylor by any chance?
I did, she loves a good haggle. But her prices are very fair.
That's the issue I'm having, the offer seems almost too tempting.
Well, she's a friend so she wouldn't make a mug of you.
I don't know about that one.
Look, if you're not going to get that, then I will.
Right ,so I wanted to go to the football game and Taylor wanted to go to the concert.
How did you two resolve it in the end?
She made me a very tempting offer.
Oh right, seems a little sneaky.
It really was, kind of seems too tempting.
If it's too good to be true, it probably is.
Does anybody else want something to drink?
Do you have bottled water?
No. I gave Addison a glass because I only have tap water.
I have a soda in my car. Maybe I'll get some ice for that.
OK, I'll get you a cup for ice.
Thank you.
I don't get why my kids don't let me know when they will be late.
How late were they?
Over 10 minutes. I called over and over but they didn't answer.
Maybe the phones were shut off, being in school and all.
I don't know. They got home and acted like nothing was wrong.
You should ask them.
I couldn't let this man slap me again.
I just don't understand why we need all this violence.
Some people don't know how to solve their issues without fighting.
I've seen that, but why on earth does he need to slap you?
Because he wanted to act like the big man, so I put my foot down.
I hope they got a taste of their own medicine.
He tried to hit me again.
How did you get away?
He was coming at me, and I stopped his arm and yelled at his face. I think that put him off.
Good girl, you got away and that is all that matters. We are moving you out tomorrow.
A whole month has past since my dog has been gone.
Did anyone respond to those lost dog posters?
No. And he was such a good dog too.
Do you think somebody found him and just kept him?
I hope so. I hope they are good people and take good care of my dog.
Yeah. He was such a cute dog, I'm sure somebody has him.
Sorry if I come across as rude.  I have been fairly upset lately.
I don't think you are rude, do you want to talk about why you are upset.
Well you know my dog? We lost him about a month ago and haven't seen him since.
Ah, I love you dog.  And you haven't seen or heard of him?  That's troubling.
Nope.  We even offered a reward and put up fliers.
Sorry to hear about that.  I'll let you know if I hear or see of anything.
I really miss my dog.
I'm so sorry Bailey. How long has he been missing now?
It's been a month. I have to come to grips with the fact that he's not coming back.
Well hopefully someone found him and is giving him  a good home, just like you did.
I sure hope so. I think I'll go take down all the signs.
Why don't you give it another week? Then I'll help you take them down.
My parents gave me the extra house that they bought on the same property as them.
That is so cool, but how close to their house is it?
It is about half a mile away, they own a lot of land.
Oh that isn't very bad, I was thinking they would be right on top of you.
It will be convenient when we have kids and my parents can be right there to baby sit as well.
Yeah that is a good thing when you think about it.
I finally got the house from my parents
Was it the gift you wanted?
Yes they gave it to me since they are moving
I love that you have a close relationship with them
They mean the world to me
Enjoy the house!
The more people I get to sign my consent form the more powerful I become.
What are you going to do with all that power though? That is the question.
I just love controlling people and having power over their lives.
That sounds like it could get dangerous.
I like being controlling and being able to manage the lives of others.
I think you are going to make a mistake and this is all going to come crashing down.
Addison is so bossy man.
Why do you say that?
Well, I absolutely hate the thought of drinking anything other than soda, but she's making me drink water!
I think she's just looking after your health.
Or being annoying.
Nah it's not like that, she cares about you Jan.
Addison hid my soda today.  I was so upset, I drink nothing but soda.  She says I need to be healthier and so she made me drink water.
Water is good for you.
I know that, but I was annoyed that she took away my soda.
You sound like you might be addicted to it.
I do get anxiety when there's no soda around.  Addiction runs in my family.
Maybe you should cut down on drinking soda slowly.
I'm going to have a soda with dinner
Hasn't Addison forbidden it?
I'd rather have soda though, she won't know this one time.
So what's the deal with this anyway.
Well, she said that I can only have water from now on because soda is too unhealthy for me.
Hey, I really am quite thirsty right now. If only I could have soda.
I know, we ran a few miles today. Here, I'll go in the store and get you some.
I can't, Addison said I can only drink water.
No kidding, is there any reason why I shouldn't buy you this fresh soda right now?
It's for health reasons, I was becoming way too dependent on it.
Yeah, at least you're cutting down on the sugars.
I really didn't want Aubrey to go to breakfast with my friend.
Are you getting a little jealous?
As a matter of fact, I am. I hate it when my friends distance themselves from me.
It sucks, but you'll get through it.
So my friend decided to go to breakfast with Aubrey, I'm mad.
There is literally nothing to be mad about here.
I know why she did it, but I have to keep it a secret.
Well now you've got to tell me.
I have met a lot of evil people in my days.
There are a lot of bad people out there.
Yes, some of them are really nasty.
I agree, I know some of them, selfish, uncaring.
I must be unlucky.
Funny, why you think so?
It feels like I've faced all the kinds of evil persons here. There truly are some evil humans on earth.
Damn Jesse.
I was looking for a bright red jacket.
Well, it looks like that isn't bright red, but it is very blue!
I know, I know. It's not what I was looking for, but I took it.
Looks good on you.
Stop, I'm blushing!
I think the jacket looks great, even though it's the wrong colour.
It could be better, it could be worse.
Well that's not very reassuring!
Hey, I've got to give you an honest opinion.
So yesterday, I stopped into that store to grab the jacket we saw.
Oh, the pink one?
Yeah but they only had it in blue.
That's frustrating. What did you do?
I bought it. The blue one is pretty too.
Yeah I kind of like that colour better.
I got a new jacket today. It wasn't the colour I wanted though.
How does it look?
It's pretty nice and my mom said the colour was perfect.
What had you wanted?
I wanted it in purple. The only one they had was blue.
I bet blue looks great on you.
I totally wanted to go on a shopping spree yesterday, but stayed home instead.
Why? If you wanted to go shopping, why would you stay home?
Well, I wanted to put the money aside.
Oh, I get it. In case of emergency.
Exactly. I wanted to leave the money in my account instead.
I think that's good. Responsible decision.
I think I should go shopping and spend lots of money.
I don't know, Remy, are you sure?
Yes, money is for spending.
But aren't you saving for a car?
You're right, I'll just leave my money in the bank.
I think that's a good idea.
I wanted to buy that swimming pool so bad.
Where did you see it?
On a swimming pool site.
Why didn't you buy it?
I've been spending too much. I'm going to start saving money.
Its good that you saved the money.
I told you already. I don't want to go shopping, I'm trying to resist the urge.
Why not?  You have plenty of money.
Because there is nothing I need and would rather save for next years vacation.
That's responsible but boring of you.
We can still have fun and I'll tag along without spending.
Awesome!  I'll pick you up in 15 minutes.
I asked my dad about his charming techniques back in the day.
Oh, your dad dated around a lot when he was young?
Yeah, I don't think he was very proud. He wouldn't tell me anything.
That's strange.
I think he was too embarrassed, I'll ask again another time.
I'll teach you a thing or two in the meantime.
How can they call themselves my friends? I threatened them to tell me exactly what happened or I would never speak to them again.
Maybe they didn't want to break your heart.
It's absolutely ludicrous, I should be the first person they tell this to.
I think you're right and I'm sorry you're going through this.
I need some sort of distraction from all this.
Let me take you on a walk.
I am just telling you that will be the last time those guys lie to me
Take it easy, they just weren't ready to tell you.
No, they should have told me the truth about my husband. Hiding it is not helping anyone.
It is a difficult situation and they didn't know what to do.
How awful is it to find out about your husband cheating and your friends lying? I've threatened to take legal action.
Ok, you're not messing around.
They shouldn't lie about serious subjects like this one. I took my stance and threatened them.
Those lying, good for nothing fakes! And that scumbag!
Just feels like double the betrayal.
I'll be here for you don't you worry. That's all in the past now..
I'm so glad I have you in my life.
Let's just have a beer and forget all about it.
I had an accident this morning.
Oh no, what happened?
My toilet overflooded and all of my basement is flooded.
So what are you going to do?
I called a repairman to help me fix it.
That's probably the best solution.
Its wet, everything is all wet.
What happened? The place looks like a mess!
A water line broke from the storm and I'm waiting for the repairman to get here.
How bad is it?
Well, the basement is about an inch deep in water. If the repairman doesn't get here by noon the whole thing will be flooded.
That doesn't sound very good. I can drop by to see what I can do.
I feel really bad.
What is it?
I've signed up Carson for summer camp, but only because I wanted to be alone and play video games.
What? So you manipulated the situation just so you could be alone?
Hey, I mean. He wanted to go anyway.
Then you shouldn't feel bad.
I think summer camp would be good for Carson.
You just want to sit at home all day and play video games.
Now that he's at camp, I can play video games instead of providing direct childcare.
Don't you encourage Carson to get out more?
Yes, but that does not apply to me. I was always outside at his age.
I guess he would be worse than you at your age, at this rate.
I went over to their house. No one would open the door.
They can't stand you. You know that. I was there, but its their house.
I don't understand why whey hate me so much. I haven't done anything to them.
Look, I don't know. I'm still your friend though. They don't have to like you.
If you were really my friend, you would say something to them.
I did. I told them they were rude, and they should have let me know you were at the front door.
I've been rehearsing for the Shakespeare play all day.
When is the performance?
It opens on Saturday. I feel pretty good about it. I play a lowly squire.
Is anyone else performing in it that I know?
Jasmine is in it. We get in a fight in one scene and I call her a wastrel.
That sounds funny! I'll have to come watch.
I am really into this renaissance stuff.
You have been hanging out with Robin Hood?
I called thee a wastrel.
Did he get mad at you?
He said I was nothing but a squire and punched my lights out.
You forgot your lance and shield again didn't you?
I had the biggest burger you'll ever see at this restaurant!
Wow, what was on it?
Lettuce, tomatoes, onions, and spinach!
Wow, did it taste good with spinach?
That was the best part!
I'm surprised!  I've got to try it.
I'm so hungry.
I know. I can't wait to eat.
Oh, the food is here. I'm going to get started right away. Sorry I can't wait for you.
That's okay. Go ahead and eat.
Oh, that's so good.
I'm glad you like it.
I was starving.
I see you cant wait to eat.
Seriously, I haven't eaten all day.
Oh well enjoy.
Man, maybe I was hungry but this food just taste amazing.
I'm going to go with you were hungry and anything would've tasted amazing.
You don't think they make great food here?
It's not bad, just not amazing.
I hear that, since I've never said it was amazing before.
That's exactly my point.
Man, I thought I had enough gas to make it to school but I ran out when I was almost there!
Oh no, was there a place close by or did you call triple AAA.
The gas station was at the corner so I walked over with my spare can and got 1 gallon of gas to take back.
Was that enough to get the car going again?
It was but I went ahead and stopped at that store and filled my tank.
Lucky for you, the gas station was right there!
I ran out of gas on the freeway yesterday.
That's tricky, how did you get out of that situation?
I pulled over and called my friend who was a few metres ahead of me.
So they had some extra gas?
No, we siphoned some from her tank and I was able to drive up to the gas station ahead.
That was helpful of them.
I can't believe it, but I ran out of gas on the freeway!
Oh, no! That must have been scary. What did you do?
Fortunately I have an auto club membership. I called and they bought some gas to me.
Did you have enough to get home?
They only put in a gallon, but that was enough to get to the gas station and fill up.
I bet you'll be more careful about making sure your tank doesn't get too low in the future.
Can't wait to see my mom later, I wish I hadn't missed her birthday.
Yeah that's too bad, why aren't you there now?
I would be but she's working today.
Oh, makes sense.
I got her some nice flowers and a cake to make up for it.
That was nice, I bet she'll like that.
I saw my mom, but it was late.
Why was your mom so late?
She was working and the boss wanted her to stay a little later.
It's nice your mom can work. Mine can't.
She really lives her independence and being able to afford travel.
I hope I'm like her when I get older.
I just sent out such a terrible email, I am so embarrassed.
Who was it too?
The whole office staff, about whether or not people could wear hats or ties or pins with political stances.
You know to just let HR deal with it, that's touchy subject with everyone.
Yeah, I just got so worked up I ended up writing a rambling nonsensical rant and hit send before thinking my answer through.
Well, you can't undo it now, better start writing a clean up email now.
Oh man. I was blabbering in class today for like a minute. I didn't know the answer to that question.
It wasn't that bad. Everyone thought it was funny .
The teacher didn't. I hope she doesn't lower my grade after that mess.
Oh well, I am pretty sure she doesn't care. She has like a 100 students.
I am a people person and have always been.
I know, you have always tried to do things for others.
That is why I decided to run for Congress.
You will do good in representing the people.
I want to be there for the common people.
You have a big heart.
I think I can really make a difference running for Congress.
What kind of platform are you going to be running on?
I'm going to do my best to stand up for the common person.
Isn't that what all politicians say?
Yes, but I think I can really convince people by making the general public support me because of my history.
Well if it helps, I would vote for you.
Are you backing me for Congress?
As your friend, of course, but I would like to know what you stand for.
I am for the common person.
And who is a common person?
Those who work for a living as opposed to those who get their money from investing or live off inheritances.
That's a little general, but something I can support.
I just got a real office!
Hey that's great. Wow your business is really taking off.
It's just a small space. But the price was right.
Where is the property at?
It's downtown, right off the State and Lake stop.
What a great location!
I needed an office.
What did you do?
I rented one of the managing properties for a small amount.
Oh that worked out then.
Yeah, we really needed an office for the business.
Well good luck on the new adventure.
I rented the managing properties so that I can have an office for my business.
Did you pay a lot in rent?
Not really. I only had to pay a small fee.
That's good. What's your business?
I sell high end purses online.
How is that going?
So do you think the others would like this office then?
They absolutely would.
The person renting it said they can rent it out to us for a small fee.
That would be great Bailey, we should sign the contract when it is ready.
Sounds great!
I think we can rent out these managing properties for a small fee
This would be a great spot for our new office
I really love the location and their isn't even too much traffic
Hopefully we can get started by the end of the week
Let me tell you about this girl that I met today.
This sounds exciting, tell me more.
So today I met this girl named Robin and we have so much in common.
I'm really happy for you I hope you really works out.
Me too, I'm going to work really hard on it.
I wish you both the best of luck.
I met a really cool girl at school today.
Oh nice. What's her name?
Robin. Not only is she totally cute but we have so much in common.
That's so cool. We should all go hang out sometime.
That'd be fun! She seemed to really enjoy hanging out with me. I think like me she doesn't have a ton of friends.
I'm glad you two found each other. She's welcome to join us anytime.
I made friends with someone new today.
That's nice Carson, who was it?
A new person in my school called Robin, we had a lot in common.
You must be glad!
I'm going to start working on these projects.
Are they easy projects?
No, I thought they would be when I opened the form, but a lot of them are really tough.
At least you'll get experience working on tough stuff.
I hard a hard time deciding what project to work on.
Yes there are a lot of interesting projects.
I wanted to make sure I picked on that I can work on all night.
That is hard some times but once you do you will be fine.
Hey check out my zombie costume for Halloween!
Wow Skylar, you made that yourself?
Yes, it took about 12 hours total to build and make all of it.
That's a very impressive costume you made!
Thanks, and I think this is going to be a great Halloween.
I'm looking forward to it and think it'll be great!
I just won a costume contest for Halloween.
Oh, cool! Congratulations. Did you win anything?
I got some gift certificates.
What was your costume of?
I made a custom superhero costume.
That sounds really interesting.
I won the $500 costume contest.
I knew you would win after I saw your costume.
I thought I had a good shot but wasn't sure.
How long did it take you to make that?
It took me about a week to make it.
Next year I'm hiring you to make mine.
When it comes to life sentences, most of the inmates that get those have committed murder.
But what is the person who committed the murder is a minor?
Minors cant still be tried as adults and receive life sentences.
But how can the courts sentence someone to life if they have not fully developed their brain yet?
That is a good question, and I only know the answer because of the legal side of it.
Well, I don't think that is fair at all for the minor.
It doesn't look good for Tracy with this murder charge.
Oh no, that is awful.
Well, Tracy's fingerprints are on the murder weapon.
Do you think you will be able to get her off?
No, she is probably facing a life sentence.
That's so unfair!
I was advising Tracy this weekend.
What was the court case?
It was a murder. She is accused of killing her husband.
Yikes! What's the sentence?
Life in prison without parole.
That sounds really scary. What are you going to do?
I don't think my dog likes me.
What's going on with your dog?
Everyday he tries to run away.
What have you been doing to stop that.
I lock him inside now, he's not allowed out.
I don't think that will make him like you.
I didn't not want my dog to run away so I had to keep her locked up inside.
Does she ever get out?
I let her when I am home from work. We go on long walks.
That's good that she gets out and gets exercise.
I feel horrible locking her up when I am not home. My last dog ran out onto the street and was killed by a car.
You are just looking out for your dog's safety.
I am really worried about my dog escaping.
Yeah that can be dangerous. What do you plan to do?
I think I will keep my dog locked inside during the day.
That is a good idea, it can't get loose if it's in the house.
Yeah, I'll be sure he has time to exercise later so he does not get restless.
Good thinking, you can always take him for a walk in the evening.
I decided to evenly split the money with Ash because he gave me the money to buy the ticket.
That is so nice of you, how much did you win?
We won $1000.
Awesome! I bet Ash is super excited by this.
Yeah, he said he has bills he needs to pay off so I think he is very grateful.
Getting essentially free money is always awesome no matter how much it is!
I won a big lottery ticket and I didn't even buy my own ticket.
How did you do that?
I forgot my wallet but wanted a ticket when Ash and I went to the deli. He lent it to me and I won!
I can't believe you actually won something with borrowed money.
I am splitting it with him. He was the real reason I bought it.
What a good friend, I bet he's going to be thrilled.
So I had some big news for Ash.
What was it?
I won the lottery with a ticket I bought with money I borrowed from Ash!
Holy moly! Congratulations! What are you going to do with the money?
Well, since Ash lent me money to buy the ticket, I decided to share the money with him!
Jan that is so kind!
We are having the surprise party on Saturday for Jesse's birthday.
I can take her to get her nails done, that will give you time to decorate.
Can you pick her up around 7?
I will call her right now.
I have a big surprise for Jesse!
The birthday party, right?
Yes you have to come, we are planning to take Jesse to a theme park and buying a big cake after.
Okay, I hope the surprise works
Jesse has no idea.
I'm thrilled to be a part of it.
I finally did it!
What are you talking about Austin?
I talked to Bailey after school.
Did you tell her how she makes you feel?
I tried to, but I was so nervous I kissed Bailey and quickly ran off.
Wow Austin, that's a big step.
I think I will make myslef a cake for my 21st birthday.
You do make the best cakes!
Best in town most people would say but I don't want to have a big ego.
They are no doubt the best in towns hands down!
Is it weird I want to make myself my own birthday cake?
I don't think so, does no one want to get you one?
No, a few friends said they would be happy to buy me one but I don't like store bought cakes so much.
What about if they baked you one?
To be honest, I make the best cakes in town so I would rather eat my own.
Then it sounds like you know what you want and should just bake yourself your own birthday cake and be happy.
I really want to make the cake for the party. My cakes are the best around. Should I offer to do it for a discount?
That sounds like an option. Have you discussed this with them?
I hinted that I wanted to make the cake, but I'm not sure if they listened.
Maybe you need up be more direct.
Yeah, or maybe they don't like my cakes.
You never know. That's why you should talk to them.
I want to make a cake for my friends!
Oh cool, you do make the best cakes in town.
I just need to think of a flavour everyone would like.
Good luck, I hope you make a tasty one!
I will try my best.
You will have to invite me so I can try a piece.
I'm making a cake for Steve's birthday.
Oh what kind are you making?
A dark chocolate cake.
That sounds delicious. That's so nice of you to make it yourself.
Well I figure I make the best cakes of anyone I know, so I should probably just make it myself so it turns out like I want.
And you're so humble too!
I want live a long and healthy life.
You should take good care of your body to achieve that.
I always go for only health meals.
That means you are setting yourself up for success.
I began to eat healthier foods like fish, fruits and vegetables.
Have you tried kale and quinoa?
Yes. I just want to live longer than my grandfather.
I heard he had an untimely death.
Yeah, and he is only forty years older than I am.
I guess I would be disappointed too if I could only live another forty years.
Wow look at all this food, they did a great job at catering this event!
They sure did, my favourite so far has been the cake table, here try this cheesecake, it's amazing.
Oh no thank you, you enjoy it! No sweets for me today.
Do you not like sugar?
I do but I want to live a long life for my grand children so I only eat healthy.
Good for you! Maybe you could give me some pointers.
Man, eating healthy is tough sometimes.
If it's so tough, why don't you eat junk sometimes?
Well, I really want to live a long life.
Does what you eat promote a long life?
Yeah, I go for low fat, high fibre, high protein, natural and unprocessed foods.
Yeah that does sound like a pain to maintain.
I am so thankful that you have shown me a way of healthier eating.
I just want you to live a long and prosperous life.
I understand that, and that is why I am extremely grateful so thank you.
Isn't it not that tough being a vegan though, in general?
I agree, as honestly many of the substitutes taste just like the regular versions anyways.
We should try to get more of our friends to eat healthy as well.
I'll show you all the things I show the visitors when they want a tour.
That sounds like fun. I love art galleries. Do you have any local artists?
Oh, yes, lots of them, and some pretty famous painters from other countries. Here, look at this painting.
Oh my gosh, is that a Monet?
Yes, it's on loan for two weeks. I feel like I'm standing next to the artist when I look at it. I can't believe it's here.
I feel the same way. Look how beautiful the colours are. Pictures in a magazine or online don't do it justice.
And this painting is entitled Satan Stole My Teddy Bear.
Whoa. That's dark, man.
Yes, it is. The artist felt is represented childhood innocence lost in the moral corruption of modern society.
No, man. I mean the painting is really dark. It's almost all black.
It's abstract. It's open to interpretation.
Well, I interpret it as dark and hard to see.
Welcome to my new gallery. Can I show you around?
Yes, thank you Taylor. It is good to see you and I'm excited to look around.
A lot of the current collection is from my old gallery but there is one piece in particular that you may be interested in.
Excellent. Which one is that?
This one here. You can see the artist painted with intent. He took his inspiration from the waves of the ocean juxtaposed against the night sky.
Stunning. How much does the painting cost?
I can't believe we are both grounded for a month.
I had no idea my mom would find out we were home that day.
She just happened to come home early because she sick.
We never should have stayed home from school to play video games.
Now, no video games and no sleepovers.
Hopefully our moms will let us off early for good behaviour.
Hey, what's up?
Hey Austin, nothing much you tell?
I was grounded for a month.
Oh no, why?
Because I played video games too much and missed school.
Okay, well you should not play too much.
I can't believe my parent's grounded me for an entire month!
Well, they did warn you quite a bit to ease up on the video games.
I don't understand why it bothered them so much.
It's because your grades were slipping at school Austin.
Well, it's my life, not theirs.
They care about your future Austin.
My family came over and we had breakfast together.
Did you go to the brunch place near your apartment?
Yeah, it was delicious and really nice to be with my family.
I bet they were really happy to see you too. It sounds so lovely.
I was so glad my family all came out to the diner this morning!
That is lovely Skylar, I bet they really miss seeing you.
I think they do, the diner we went to had excellent breakfast.
I've never been there before, but I am sure it was tasty.
It is my favourite breakfast place to eat.
I will have to go and check it out sometime.
I just commissioned a painting with an amateur artist.
Aren't you worried that it may turn out terrible?
I am giving this artist the benefit of doubt, he seems to have huge potential.
I can't wait to see the finished product.
I have my fingers crossed too.
When do you expect the finished product?
Today was a long day, especially my drive home from the office.
Oh yeah?
Yes, I did not think I would ever make it because I was so tired.
Good thing you stayed awake.
Yeah! Just as I was about to fall asleep I turned in to my driveway.
Well that is a good thing. Get some rest!
I have been stuck in traffic for over an hour.
That is the absolute worst.
Yes, there was a wreck on the interstate.
That always makes the drive home longer.
We had inventory at work today too.
I'm sure you're glad to be home.
After my car crashed I saw God.
Weren't you unconscious because you flew from the car window?
Yeah, but he came to me and told me to give my life to him.
Okay.
I feel so conflicted right now.
Tell me about your testimony.
Well I saw God come out of the sky one day.
What did God say to you?
He told me to give everyone's life up to Him.
That sounds quite calming.
I always wanted to see the light.
So you think you saw the real thing?
It was more I felt it then I saw it.
How did you feel?
I feel rejuvenated and blessed.
I'm happy for you Kendall keep up the good work.
I really wanted to make Kendall feel included.
How did you go about doing that?
I asked Kendall to come up with some ideas then started to put those ideas into action.
Wow, that must've made her feel included.
That was the plan.
Great work Addison.
I really like Kendall's ideas. This pit crew could really use a go-getter like her. Plus, I think if we implement her suggestions we may be able to shave off a few more seconds from our best time.
Well if you like her ideas you should consider putting them into action.
That's a good point, I want Kendall to feel included, we all do. This is a tight-knit unit.
I feel that. You should talk to her about making her ideas a reality.
I will get right on that.
Great team work Addison.
This is been one of the longest months ever.
I know how hard it has been for you.
I think I was about to quit after a week.
I think your work really paid off.
I can see the finish line and I am going to make it.
You should really proud of yourself.
I been studying so hard for my exams.
Yeah you have been overworked.
I failed the past two, it felt like it was all in vain.
Don't beat yourself up over it, did you do well now?
Yes I actually passed!
Awesome! I knew you had it in you.
I tried for a month to fix our relationship.
You stood by him during the war, he came back different.
I love him, but he is cruel, I have to protect the kids. I can make it on my own.
You will not be on your own, I will be here for you.
I can't believe I was brave enough to walk a tight rope as a kid.
Sounds exciting. How did it go?
Well, I almost fell as the crowd watched but luckily I spun off and caught myself.
It must've been an awesome experience.
I was this close to messing up my performance.
I was watching from the audience and thought you were going to fall!
The tight rope is tricky, but I knew that if I spun around as soon as I went off balance, I could get my balance again and correct myself.
Everybody in the crowd cheered.
I watched a movie with Ash last night.
Was it a good one?
It was a scary movie.
Ash hates horror films.
Yes I had to keep holding his hand during the scary parts.
That is sweet.
The scary part came on and I had to hold onto Ash tightly.  It was so stressed out the whole movie.
Why did you go see a horror?
Ash picked the movie. He bought tickets for both of us and didn't tell me until we got there.
Did you watch any of it?
The parts that weren't scary, I was able to watch.
At least you didn't walk out of the movie.
My hold got so tight with Ash when the scary part happened in the horror film.
Yeah, watching scary moves make me tighten up.
Same.
Was it a good movie?
My doctor is lowering the dosage of the drug I am taking to help me wean off it.
That's good, I don't think you should be using drugs, I am glad she is helping you.
I am glad I am finally getting help, I need to get off this toxic drug.
I wish you never got addicted to the drug, the people who got you addicted are evil.
It's my fault I got addicted. I am working to get my life back.
You have a ton of courage to fight this addiction, you can do this!
I found out something really dark about someone. Should I tell people?
Tell me the secret first!
You know the philosopher I hate? I found out he never went to college for his job.
Wow that is major news. Why do you want to tell people?
I guess because I hate him and they should know the real him.
I see. Maybe it's best to not worry about it too much.
I hope that me mentioning Cameron's name doesn't get him in trouble.
No, I doubt that will happen.
Yeah I just don't want anything bad to happen to him.
Do you think that you'll get the job?
For some reason I have a good feeling about it.
That would be great if you guys get to work together.
I brought up Cameron being my friend so maybe I could get a shot at working in the same company.
Do you think that will really matter?
Cameron is really good friends with me and is well respected by everyone who works there.
So you think he can put in a good word for you then?
I hope so, this is honestly my dream job and I need all the help I can get to work there.
I really hope you get it and I hope Cameron can help you out.
My best friend Cameron works at the company I want to work for, so I mentioned his name in the interview.
That's cool. So he referred you for the job?
Yes. I asked him to do that before I did my interview.
That's cool he got you in the door.
I will probably get the job.
Sounds like a cool situation for both of you.
I applied for a job at the same place that Cameron works at. I mentioned his name during the interview because I want to job.
Where did you apply?
It's a top law firm in the town. They do a lot of corporate law.
Do you think you will get the job?
The couple of people who interviewed really seem to like me. They said they like my qualifications.
That's hopeful.
Your invitation came right on time. I was just looking for a fundraiser to help.
I did think of you, because I know the support of causes, as long as can help.
You are right. I always like to give back and help those who need.
If I had your kind of money, I would too.
Don't forget, they didn't just fall off a tree. I worked hard to get where I am.
I know. I was just you. I appreciate that you are here. Always willing.
I'm glad you sent me an invite to the Feeding America fundraiser.
In America, no one should go hungry.
It's a great mission. They do great work.
Their funds are low due to the pandemic and everyone being out of work. So many people need food now.
I have plenty of money and will make a sizable donation.
That's why I invited you. You're the best for these causes!
I am surprised that I was able to act so fast in that emergency.
I knew you could do it. You stayed cool when giving Tracy mouth to mouth.
Thank God I got that CPR certification. I never thought I'd have to use it.
Your action convinced me that everybody needs to know CPR.
Just thankful I was able to save a life.
Yeah. That was frightening. Thank God you were there.
I have to try and recuscitate her so she can survive. I have to give her mouth to mouth!
Wow man! You really know how to do CPR well. Do you think Tracy will survive?
Yeah I'm pretty sure she'll be fine. I have to whip her head around a little and give her some compressions.
Right, I hope she survives and gets better.
Exactly. I think she'll live and be just fine.
Let's all hope so.
Well, now we're going to be very late getting to work. My car is stuck in the snow.
You went ahead and drove even though you were warned not to?
I've missed too much work lately, so I decided to drive against my better judgment.
How can I help? Do you need a tow truck?
No thanks, we're waiting for roadside service to pull us out of the snow.
I hope I will see you soon. Next time, please listen to warnings.
I'm leaving.
No don't go outside, there is snow.
Everything will be fine.
Trust me, you're going to get stuck.
You were right, I'm stuck in traffic right now.
I told you.
Thanks for coming. I hated calling you but I'm desperate.
No problem. I don't mind helping out.
I'm stuck in the snow and can't call my dad because he told me not to go out.
I'll get you out of the snow but you should go home. It's nasty weather out here.
I will go home. I promise and thank you so much.
I am in such pain when I get home from work.
You are, what kind of pain?
Just from sitting all day, my back, my neck and shoulders all ache.
That sounds awful. How do you cope?
I have a nice long bath at the end of the day. It really helps.
Well, at least you've found something that gives you relief.
I feel so much better now. I took a long bath when I got home.
I love baths. Did you light candles?
I did. I really needed to relax. Plus my muscles were super achy.
Did you read or play music?
No, neither. I really just wanted to close my eyes and not concentrate on anything.
I see. I like to listen to music when I'm in the bath. It helps to relax me.
I had the best present idea for my mom.
What did you do for her?
I gave her a present every hour all day!
Wow that is a thoughtful gift.
Well they were all small things that led up to a big gift.
That was a good idea, hope she liked everything.
Just got back from my mom's house.
Oh I didn't know you were seeing her today.
Yeah, it's her birthday. She turned 70.
Oh! Happy birthday to your mom!
Thanks! I got her a whole bunch of gifts and she was so excited she cried!
That's so sweet! Your mom is the cutest!
I'm so broke!
What did you spend all your money on?
It's my mom's birthday. I bought her so many presents.
Wow tell her I said happy birthday! Why did you buy her so much if you couldn't afford it?
She's done so much for me I just wanted her to know how special she is.
I'm sure she knows that with or without gifts. But that was still really sweet of you.
It was my mother's birthday today!
Did you attend the birthday?
Yes! I gave her so many gifts.
Wow! That's so generous of you.
Yes!
I hate when people try to talk over me.
Yeah me too it makes me raise my voice.
I know that feeling.
Yeah, people need more social etiquette.
Agreed.
Definitely.
I was so angry at my department meeting today! I kept getting interrupted when I was trying to talk.
How rude! Who was interrupting you?
The new girl. She thinks she knows everything. She didn't let me finish a single sentence before butting in with her stupid opinion.
What did you do?
I finally just spoke louder and louder until she got the message. I think I was practically yelling by the end.
Good for you for not letting her bully you.
I was trying to speak but everyone keeps talking over me.
Maybe they were just trying to voice their opinions.
I was too.
You could let them talk first so you don't have to talk over each other.
In the end I was talking louder to talk over them.
That must've been very loud.
I really want to explain my side but nobody listens to me.
You just have to wait for a oppurtunity to get your words in.
People never let me tell my side of the story.
Sadly there isn't much you can do.
I will just speak louder and louder until people listen.
I guess that could work.
I think I found what was causing the issue.
Really, what was it?
Well I followed the installation document again and we had skipped a whole section at setup.
I can totally believe that. We were working pretty fast.
Yes, we had to setup a printer and scanner in the steps or else the program wouldn't work.
Well thanks for figuring that out, Kai
So Jan is becoming a little entrepreneur.
Oh good for her! What's she selling?
She has a little lemonade stand in front of our house. Although I'm wondering why I don't get a cut since I'm the one making the lemonade!
Yeah you should out her for slave labour. Put something on Facebook.
I know! I'm proud of her though. She really has fun running her little operation.
That's great. It'll be great for her confidence.
Jan never listens to me!
What do you mean?
It was time for us to start the lemonade stand and she wasn't doing anything.
What did you do?
I took her to one side and told her to take the lemonade outside.
I hope she listens in the future.
I am really looking forward to making money selling lemonade.
Yes, we can finally save money to buy tickets to the concert.
I wonder how many glasses of lemonade we will sell today.
My guess is thirty cups an hour.
I already feel like an entrepreneur.
We will be very successful selling lemonade.
I don't enjoy it when people argue but I had to take sides in the end.
Yea that was shocking and very interesting.
I didn't think that it was that big of a deal but I had to step in before things got worse.
Yes, good job on that you did good on that argument.
I'm getting so fed up with Tracy's behaviour lately. I don't know how much more I can take.
Uh oh, what did she do this time?
It's what she didn't do that's the problem. She doesn't have a job. She doesn't pay any bills.
So she can't carry her own weight? Get rid of her!
Well it's only gotten really bad the past few weeks. I gave her an ultimatum to get a job and pay her half of the rent and bills, or get out.
Good! Let's hope she listens!
Addison really helped me out today.
How so?
She really helped a lot, in fact, we did better than we ever did before.
Did you make a lot of money?
We made pretty much the maximum amount of money we could make in one day.
Maybe she should start helping every time then!
I thanked Addison so much for her help! I couldn't have made all these profits without her!
She sounds like a great addition to the team.
I told her she should look for a job in it! She'd be great!
Maybe you should hire Addison?
I will ask my boss if we have any openings and recommend Addison.
That would be great for her.
I saved Kendall's life near a cliff.
Kendall is always reckless when climbing.
She lost her footing near the edge, and I had to drag her back.
It's dangerous to go climbing with her.
I don't think she is going to climb anymore.
She finally developed some self-awareness.
I was hiking with Kendall today in the mountains and she almost fell off a cliff!
Yikes! That sounds so dangerous.
I grabbed her arm just as her foot slipped at the edge.
How did she not see it?
It's hidden by brush so it's easy to miss.
They should put up warning signs. You saved a life!
It was like winning the lottery. One day I was struggling to make ends meet, and the next day I was buying a home in L.A. and driving a brand new Lamborghini.
That's such a great story! Did a rich relative die and leave you a fortune?
No, nothing like that. I was working in the mines processing coal and I found the biggest diamond ever found in North America.
Oh my god! What are you going to do with so much money?
I'm going to pay all my debts, buy my children a house and put a million dollars in each of their brokerage accounts!
Wow! Can I hang out with you as much as possible forever?
Can you believe it? I never have that kind of luck.
If I were you, I'd officially consider myself lucky now.
I know, right? I made over $10,000 from the mine.
Incredible. Do you know what you're going to do with it?
Are you kidding? I can get myself totally out of debt now.
You're so lucky. I would give anything to have a clean slate like that.
I went to Alaska to search for gold.
Did you have any luck?
I struck it rich at the mine I was operating.
That is wonderful to hear.
Even better, I was able to pay off all our debts as a result.
I envy your success my friend.
I am glad that I am able to teach others.
What made you want to be a teacher?
It was a high school mentor that inspired me to become a teacher.
That must be great to have someone like that.
They were always there for me in my studies.
I wish I had someone who was like that, who would inspire me.
I think I finally decided to major in education. My High School mentor really inspired me
Was he a good teacher?
He was a teacher and a mentor. He could explain things so well and told me I could do the same.
I think that's a rewarding career. How many years until you can get your license?
I should be done in about 12 months if it goes well in school.
You'll make a great teacher. I'm sure the kids will love you.
I think I'm going to be a teacher.
Really? Where did you get that idea?
My high school mentor really showed me what a difference teachers can make in the lives of kids.
That is really great that you want to give back.
Yeah, kids are the future.
Kendall was so stressed out this morning at breakfast that he couldn't even talk to our parents!
Really? What happened, why was he stressed?
We were finishing up and on the way to the school bus and Kendall couldn't get his words out fast enough.
I feel bad for him! He must have been freaking out if he started stuttering! So what did you do?
Well, when he started to stutter I decided that I would finish his sentence for him.
That's nice of you.
Kendall was too excited to get out the words to our parents, so I finished his sentence for him and told our parents that we had won the prize!
What did your parents say?
My mom was speechless, but of course, my dad asked about taxes right away.
Do you have to pay taxes on the prize?
Yes, it comes to about three grand.
Do you guys have that between you to pay it off?
I used to cook for my family every weekend. We would all gather at my parent's house and eat great meals. Then I suddenly lost them all in a car crash.
That's traumatic. Are you okay?
I am not the same anymore. I feel guilty for living. Why was I the one who survived?
What a horrible feeling to live with.
I don't cook anymore. It reminds me too much of my family and everything I've lost. I eat take outs every day. Cooking no longer brings me joy.
That's understandable.
I used to love cooking for my family.
I did not know that.
I lost all of my family in a car crash and after that I never cooked again.
Sorry to hear that.
Now, we just eat takeaways.
Why don't you start cooking again?
I have lost my appetite for cooking.
You cooked for your family for years.
When I lost them all to a car crash I lost interest.
How do you feed yourself now?
I just order take out.
What a sad state of affairs.
I just cannot bare to cook.
You should cook for yourself.
That's why I order pizza.
But that isn't healthy.
I don't care about health anymore.
But I care about your health.
Bailey is always so lazy.
She has been severely depressed lately.
But doesn't she have meds for that?
Yes but they don't solve all of the problems caused by depression.
I am just fed up with her always being so down, I can't deal with it anymore.
You should put yourself in her shoes.
I told Bailey she couldn't move in with me and I would not help her with her issues!
That isn't very nice, you know she is suffering from severe depression.
I don't care, she didn't care about me!
Though that is true, you should never kick someone when they're down.
Too bad, she deserved it, I will not help her and never will.
That is your choice, you should consider forgiveness, you will feel better.
Bailey being depressed all the time is really getting on my nerves.
You should give her some time to get used to her new medicince.
I am over it, I don't want to help her anymore.
That is unfortunate, you two used to be so close.
She needs to just get out of this mindset and we can go back to being great friends.
It's not just a mindset, she is suffering from sever depression.
I know it's bad sportsmanship but she was doing the same thing to me last year.
Two wrongs don't make a right though Tracy.
At that moment in time I just lost my cool.
It's understandable but it looks bad that you were mocking her.
Like I said, she did it to me last year.
Hopefully next time you'll behave differently.
I knew I was going to win so I started to mock my opponent near the finish line.
How did you know you were going to win?
I was so far ahead, there was no way that I could lose.
Well if you hadn't slowed down to mock your opponent you could've set a new record!
I regret mocking them now!
I almost got into an accident earlier today.
Damn what did you do?
I was late for an appointment and there was someone in the fast lane going slow and when I tried to go around them I didn't look into my blind spot.
So you almost hit the person that you couldn't see?
Yes and I felt so embarrassed
Well at least you didn't hit them. Just take it easy on the road it's not that serious.
Hey. I just got out of a meeting
Well, seems like you only care about the meeting than anything else
Why would you say that? That's not true
Well you just walked past my car without even saying hi. I called after you but you did not turn
I am so sorry. I was in a rush and was getting late. I guess my mind was focused on the meeting that I clearly did not hear a thing
It's alright. Don't sweat it
I'm passed that car really fast.
Why?
I'm in a hurry to get to my appointment.
Oh ok, drive safe.
I am so late with my appointment.
Is that why you are in so much hurry driving?
I really need to rush. That's why I am passing every car I can.
Well, you better be careful. You might get in an accident and that will delay further.
Yes, I am quite careful even when I and rushing.
Great! Good luck on your appointment. Be careful.
I am so sad I won't be able to go to the concert I bought tickets for.
That is awful, what are you going to do with your ticket?
I gifted it to my parents.
I am sure they will appreciate that.
I hope so, I am not sure they like the type of music that will be played.
Well at least the ticket isn't going to waste.
I gave my tickets to my parent.
Why?
I couldn't attend the concert.
Did you purchase the tickets?
Sure, I did.
Okay
I spent the entire afternoon at the DMV. It took forever.
Didn't you say you took Casey with you? He must have been bored stiff.
That's an understatement. Even for a child, he has zero patience.
So how did you deal with it?
I just kept him occupied as best as I could. He mostly played games on my phone.
See, I think that sounds like a fun way to spend an afternoon. He's lucky.
Casey wouldn't stop being so impatient.
Where were you?
We were stuck in traffic but he wouldn't keep still.
Traffic is the worst!
I know, it added an extra hour to my journey.
No wonder Casey was getting impatient.
I went to the shooting range today.
Which gun did you bring with you?
I took my father's gun.
How did you do?
I hit all my targets.
You are getting better and better!
I'm focused right now.
I see your gun is aimed at the bullseye.
I've got my mind on the win.
Good luck.
Thanks!
I had the deer in my sights when I was out there for over 10 minutes before I pulled the trigger.
So did you get it?
Yes, it is in the back of my truck if you want to see it.
What was the point count on the deer?
I think it is 12 points from what I can tell.
That is amazing, you need to get me some deer jerky off of that thing.
We went to a shooting range yesterday.
Who did you go with?
I took my sister. She's never been to one. I showed her how to hold a gun. I kept my eyes on the prize and shot the target right in the centre.
You sound like a pro.
I wouldn't say I am a pro but I do have great aim.
It's great you are showing your sister how to safely handle a gun.
I was in so much pain after falling off of the roof!
I bet you were, what happened?
I feel off the roof while trying to install a satellite dish and felt like I twisted my arm badly.
You could've hired someone to do that for you Jan!
I just wanted to save a few bucks and look what happened.
I hope that doctors bill isn't too expensive.
I am such a clumsy person. Who falls off the roof and then has to be transported to the hospital?
It doesn't take a clumsy person to fall. Maybe you got nervous up there.
I don't know but that ride to the hospital was the longest ride of my life.
Did they try to make you comfortable on the ride?
As best they could. My arm bounced on every bump which caused pain.
They should have put you in a sling while transporting you.
My brother and I we never close.
You now seem to be.
We do not have anything in common.
So what happened?
We went on a camping trip ones and there we learned to love each other.
That is awesome.
I'm feeling closer to my brother.
How did that come about?
Well, you know we don't have much in common.
Like nothing.
But on a camping trip we had time to talk a lot and found that we could bond over our feelings about things.
So, no similar interests, but similar attitudes.
My brother and I are going camping.
Are you packed and ready to go?
No but I'm excited.
Where are you going camping?
At the lake
That should be really fun.
I gave everyone the info they needed to finish the work.
That's good, did they thank you?
Some of them did, I just didn't want to deal with anyone so I did all the work.
But what about your group, how did they feel?
I don't know, probably relief that they don't really have to do anything.
I had a really busy day at work today and I really missed my puppy.
They're so needy it can be hard to leave them for hours on end.
I rushed home to take her outside but when we got there she just wanted to use the bathroom, but it was nice spending some time with her.
You can't expect all dogs to be the same.
I know, it's just something I have to get used to.
You'll get used to it soon enough.
My puppy just likes to sleep all day but she is still cute.
Puppies usually sleep a lot when they are that young.
So you think she will be more playful soon?
Yeah she is only 8 weeks old after all.
That is good, I want to be able to play with her a lot.
When she does play she is really into it so don't worry.
I upset Aubrey today.
How did you upset her?
Our boss assigned her to my project. But I don't really want her help.
Why would you turn down help on a project?
Because she always tries to change things up. So I turned her away, she walked off with a frown.
She must have felt really unappreciated.
I had to turn Aubrey away today.
I don't understand, I thought you two were really close?
We were but I just can't work with her, we clash too much.
How did Aubrey take that?
Not very well, she walked off with a frown.
I hope it doesn't impact your friendship.
I had to turn away Aubrey. She just didn't fit the criteria.
But she is your friend!
I just needed people of a certain age.
Does it really matter if she is a couple of years younger?
Yes it does. I want the results to be correct.
I just don't see how you can turn Aubrey away, Bailey.
I answered all of Kendall's questions as best I could.
What kind of questions did Kendall have?
She wanted to know everything. From start to finish.
Did you tell her about the lost keys too?
Yes, I told her everything.
She is probably home thinking of additional questions.
I spoke with Kendall earlier.
How did that conversation go?
It went fine. I just answered some questions that he had.
That was nice of you.
Yeah I just want to make sure he was clear on everything.
Good for you. It's always nice to help out a friend.
My friend Kendall had some questions about her science homework.
Were you able to help her out?
Yes, I showed her my notes and explained to her what the teacher went over in class yesterday.
That's great, did she end up understanding everything?
I think so, I provided her with all the information I could.
That's great, you're such a good friend for helping out!
Kendall had some questions for me today.
What kind of questions?
Just ones in general about her new role.
Were you able to help her and answer them?
Yes, I answered all the questions she had and provided her with some extra information
You're a great manager Robin.
I have the weekend off. It is finally time to relax.
What else do you think that you will do?
Maybe just watch a movie at home. That would be nice.
That sounds like a lot of fun to me!
I hope it will be!
Yay! I'm off from work this weekend!
Oh that's awesome. I have to work on Saturday.
It's the first time I've had off on a Saturday and Sunday since January.
No kidding! Got any plans?
I think I'm just going to relax and watch some movies at home.
Sounds like a plan!
I finally weekend off to relax. I don't think I will be leaving my house at all.
That would become boring very fast.
That is true, but I will just watch a movie whenever I feel bored.
I love watching movies too. It is a great way of passing time and relaxing.
I am going to watch a movie.
What movie?
I don't know yet, have any recommendations?
That new romantic comedy is streaming now, the one about the zookeepers.
Oh yeah, maybe I will check that out, thanks!
No problem!
I hope they get back to me soon, I'm not sure how much time I have left.
I'm pretty sure they'll get back to you soon, but there's no telling how long it's going to take to process the address change.
My lawyer says it should be within 72 hours.
That's not bad at all, I'll stick around until then and call the guys.
Thanks, I'll go check to see how security is handling the perimeter downstairs. Meet me down there after you call the guys. We're going to need everybody when we transport to the new address.
Will do, I'll tell them to bring some mattresses and supplies, things might get difficult.
I was feeling so concerned, I had to petition the government for a new address.
You need the address to be on the safer side.
Yes the assassins are closing in on me.
Please try and hide your head.
I will, thanks.
I petitioned the government for a new address.
Why did you need a new address?
The assassins were closing in on me.
Wait, what? You have assassins after you?
Yes and now I may need another address.
I asked the government to give me a new location to live because the people trying to kill me.
I'm sorry you have to deal with that. I hope you are okay.
Yeah, the government is helping me, but it isn't enough. I am afraid they will get me.
Try to be safe and careful okay?
I am definitely trying my best .
I worked hard to learn MacOS through and through for the graphics job, really hard!
Did you get the position?
No, and I can't understand why, since the HR person said I was more knowledgeable about the operating system than any of the other applicants.
I bet that job went to a family member. Or a less-qualified man.
A less-qualified man most likely.
Yeah, I think so too. Sorry, Sasha.
I finally finished my project today. I've been working on it 12 hour a day for 4 weeks.
Wow I bet you're really spent.
I am beyond spent. I finished at 10 a.m. I just came home and laid on the couch 3 hours doing nothing.
By nothing do you mean watching TV?
By nothing I mean holding nothing looking at nothing  just letting my mind relax.
Well I'm sure you really needed it.
I don't know what to get.
Ask the waitress about the specials of the day.
She said there aren't any.
That's odd. Check the menu again.
I guess I'll have the French dip sandwich.
That's a good choice.
The menu on the restaurant was so great to see.
Yeah it certainly is. Do you know what you want to order yet?
I'm actually not too sure. I think that overall there are a lot of options that are good.
Nice, well we can ask the waitress about the specials maybe.
Oh good idea, I will flag one down.
Great!
I has a secret recipe that all my friend had asked me for
What was the recipe for?
Baking a unique black forest cake that tasted like no other
Did you share the secret recipe with them?
I shared with everyone else at the party that we were invited to
Well, I guess I am the only one left. Could you share it with me?
I am totally running out of money now.
What you have you been spending money on?
I literally have been going to a concert every week at the front row.
Oh my gosh Ash, you shouldn't be doing that!
I know, I need to budget more.
Honestly it's like an addiction for you at this point.
I have a really bad habit.
What is it?
I love to go to concerts. I go to concerts every weekend.
That's a bit excessive.
Yeah, but I always make sure to sit in the front row so it's an awesome experience.
That sounds expensive.
Maybe I should start saving some of my money.
What do you spend it on ?
Well, I usually go to a concert every week.
Really? Concerts can be expensive.
I know, and I sit in the front row a lot.
You probably could save money if you skipped a few.
I met this girl Bailey from my English class. We hung out after class and found out we have so many things in common.
You should be friends.
I really want us to be friends. She's a very cool chick.
You have time to get to know her. You have the same English class this semester.
I like the class even more now. We can study together.
It's great to have a friend in class.
I told Ash the secret I've been keeping for a long time.
How did she react?
She was surprised at first, and then, she told me that it wasn't a big deal.
What did you tell her?
I told her that I've been cheating on my diet, and that's why I haven't lost a lot of weight.
Well, keep trying with your diet.
I was really stressing over cheating on that quiz in school, I've been holding it in as a secret.
Cheating isn't that bad.
I told Ash about it yesterday and she said the same thing.
Ash is right, it's not that big a deal.
I had to tell someone my secret yesterday, I have been holding onto it for so long.
Who did you tell?
Ash was the only person around, I just couldn't keep it a secret anymore so told him.
I bet it felt good to finally get that off of your chest.
I feel like I've really let things go for too long.
What do you mean? Have you been putting off something?
Yes, I haven't cleaned my room in what feels like ages.
You'd be surprised at how great it feels to have a nice organized living space!
That's what I'm sort of realizing. It's hard to be in a good mood all the time when you're surrounded in disarray.
You should do a nice thorough clean! It's really not as bad as it seems. It's almost worse thinking about it than doing it.
I was sick all weekend. I couldn't even get out of bed.
That stinks. I hate being trapped in bed.
It wasn't so bad because Skylar came to check on me and help me out.
That's so nice. Did she stay to visit?
For a bit and she made sure I had food to eat before she went home.
That's so sweet of her to do for you!
I had a long talk with my new friend.
Who did you speak with?
I went to dinner with my friend who is a cop.
What did you discuss?
After hearing about his job, I realized I had a lot in common with cops.
That is a very difficult job.
I had a great time out with my friend who was a cop the other day.
What did the two of you do?
We went to dinner together.
What did you two talk about?
We talked a lot about his time on the force.
That must've been interesting.
So I went to dinner with my friend who is a cop today.
The one from high school?
Yeah.
How was it?
Actually a lot better than I thought, I didn't realize how much we had in common.
Well that's cool.
Addison is so sick in Bed.
Has she gone to see the nurse?
No! She refused to, I'm at Addison's friend's house now
D you want them to go and check up on Addison with you?
Yes.
Addison is still sick in bed.
That's awful.
I really don't want to get ill either so I went to Addison's friend's house to stay away from her.
That is probably for the best, you don't want to catch her illness.
I just hope she can look after herself while I am away.
I am sure she will be fine.
You know Addison's friend right?
Yes, I have met her before.
Good, I just wanted to stop by her house to let her know that Addison is very sick.
I can show you which house is hers so you can talk to her.
That would be very helpful, Addison is still in bed.
I hope she feels better soon.
There is a great mentality to have because overall you have to go hard or go home sometimes.
That is a great mentality to have for things like sports because commitment is crucial.
Right, there always needs to be some sort of sacrifice in the beginning and overall a great thing to do for people.
Yes.
You are such a good sports person.
Thank you.
I have to take risks.
It's dangerous.
Yeah, I know, but it's for my safety.
I not sure about this.
I had no choice, I'd rather be risky than just not try.
Just be careful.
Being on the football team is intense.
Everyone tries their best, right?
Yeah, in the last game I put on the go hard or go home attitude.
Did it work out?
It did, it's risky but I needed to do it or not try at all.
It's better to do it.
That judge, Casey, likes to pick on me in court.
He's very strict in his courtroom and you need to listen.
I was angry and I shouted out I wasn't guilty.
That's why he called you to the bench and warned you.
The warning and now I received contempt of court.
You wouldn't keep your mouth shut so now you pay a fine.
So I fought my speeding ticket and I got Casey as a judge.
A friend as a judge. That's a nice stroke of luck.
But it turns out Casey is a stickler for the rules. She ordered me to approach the bench and I refused.
You can't disobey the judge, you know.
Well, that's why I'm calling.
Let me guess. You need me to bail you out of jail.
Sasha walked home with me yesterday.
That is nice of her, what did you guys talk about?
We both had a big test in our math class today so we talked about the answers.
Did you guys find that you had similar answers then?
Yes we both agreed on almost all of our answers.
That's a good sign.
I was talking to Sasha after school about the big test in math class.
How did you guys do?
I think we both did excellent.
How do you know that?
I copied her answers and she's really good at math.
I guess that's one way to do it.
Kendall invited me over for a sleepover this weekend.
That will be fun, what are you guys going to do?
Oh, I haven't thought about that, what do you think we could do?
You could do lots of thing, you could watch a movie, play some video games or make some food together.
Those are some good ideas, I will have a think about what I could bring.
Sounds good, enjoy your sleepover with Kendall!
I had to go to the store.
I would have went for you, I wasn't thinking of that when I cleaned out the house.
It has been 6 months since I have been home. You have helped enough.
You ready to face what is coming?
I was thinking of what I was going to cook over the course of the week.
Have you decided what you are going to cook?
I did but then I realized that I was completely out of food and didn't have the ingredients I needed.
That's why it's important to stock up.
I don't stock up. I plan things carefully for the entire week. I went to the grocery store to get what I need.
Glad you solved your food shortage problem.
I came home and didn't have a thing to cook so I had to go to the grocery store.
That's the worst chore ever!
Yes, and I was out of everything.
Did you go to the new store?
Yes, and the prices were actually lower than the other stores.
I will have to try them out.
I had to buy groceries at the last minute.
How long has it been since you went shopping?
Half a month. I was completely out of food.
How much did you buy the last time?
It was supposed to last me three weeks.
Yeah, but you're not on a diet anymore.
Sasha's family car seems to be having problems.
They only have that one car, right?
Yeah, it's their only transportation, so I took Sasha's mom to work when it didn't start this morning.
It's good that you can help them out with transportation.
I'm so glad Sasha's mom let me drive her to work and borrow her car this morning.
What happened to your car?
It was fine yesterday but it wouldn't start this morning.
Do you know what it is?
I think it may be the battery, but I didn't have time to jump it.
I hope it's something as simple as that.
We were watching a movie last night and my parents covered my eyes.
I wonder why they did that.
They said the scene was too violent for me to see.
Did you manage to see it anyway?
I did notice that it was a violent scene.
Probably for the best that you didn't watch it then.
I can't believe that I didn't get the promotion.
Maybe we should go to the mall?
Shopping always helps me cope with stress.
I love to go shopping.
I love the new outfit I found at the mall.
I think it is very stunning.
I missed out on a work promotion today.
Sorry to hear that, did you talk to your therapist about it?
No, I used retail therapy to feel better.
What did you buy?
I went to the mall and got a new outfit that looks stunning on me.
Why don't you put it on and I'll take you out to eat tonight.
I think Aubrey passing away has been the worst experience of my life.
I know it was so tragic. I can't imagine how hard that has been on you.
It is like I just can't get the memory out of my head of how she died. It is so awful to live with.
I wish there was more I could say or do for you. I know Aubrey wouldn't want to see you suffering like this.
Yeah, I suppose. It just is so hard to go on without her. I can't even eat or sleep.
You got to take care of yourself. Even though it is hard please try to do it.
I miss Aubrey so much, and my last memory of her is so awful.
You have to try to remember the good times Addison.
I'm trying, I can't eat or sleep all I can think about is what happened to Aubrey.
I'm here for you Addison, I'll help you get through it.
Thank you, maybe I should find a professional as well.
I don't think that could hurt at all.
I had to pull someone over today.
How come?
They were speeding, they were going 95 mph in a 55 mph zone on the highway.
That is way over the speed limit.
Yes, I gave them a ticket on the spot.
They shouldn't be driving if they are going that fast.
I can't believe how fast that group was driving. They were going 95 in a 55,
Oh my god. That is scary fast and crazy. What if they get into an accident?
I know that is why I stopped them, that was way too dangerous.
You did the right thing, that speed is dangerous to everyone.
I was so surprised when I went into the drawer and found all the gold jewellery.
Did you not know that your mom had collected it over the years?
No, I thought that she pawned all of it when dad died to pay the bills.
What do you plan to do with the jewellery?
I am going to melt it all down and put into bars to keep for the future.
That is a great idea, that way you have the money when you need it.
I was looking for a new investment the other day and had a great idea.
What was your idea?
I transmuted all my mother's jewellery into gold.
That's crazy! That'll be a great investment for your future.
I know, right? I should have no problems retiring on time.
Can you do that to my mother's jewellery too?
I took my mom's old jewellery she didn't want and got some money out of it.
Do you think she would have been ok with that?
She specifically told me to do that because she knew I wouldn't wear any of it.
Oh well that is okay then.
Yeah, I got over $500 from all of it in gold so it was worth it.
Wow, that is a lot of money for all that jewellery.
Check out all of this gold jewellery!
Wow! Where did you get it from?
It's my mother's. I transmuted the jewellery into gold hoping it might be an investment.
I've heard gold doesn't depreciate in value, so it sounds like a good investment.
Stephen King was signing copies of his book at the bookstore today.  I got a picture with him.  I am so excited.
That's cool. Did you get to talk to him?
Yes, but only for a second.  That place was packed with all of his fans.
I wish you would have told me because I am a fan also.
Next time we'll go together.
I always admired this author.
Who is it?
Dave the money guy.
Oh yah he's great.
I've met him before.
Oh wow I'm jealous.
I really like this author because they always have so much to share about themselves
Yeah they usually are great persons.
Yes they are
I know they are such an inspiration for you
they most definitely are.  They are great
I know. They are so cool
Did I tell you I met my favorite author in person?
No you have not. When?
Just over the weekend, at the bookstore!
Good thing you were there. Perfect timing!
I was actually there buying his newly released book. I really admire his writing.
That is just amazing! I am so happy for you.
I had this great idea for a fire pit inside my living room.
A fire pit in your living room? That sounds crazy.
I guess I didn't think it through. It was nice for awhile.
And then what happened?
I didn't realize the couch was flammable. After that, I had to call the fire department.
Next time I think you need to keep the fire outside.
I was messing around in the living room and something caught on fire.  Then it spread quickly through the space.
Did you call the fire department?
I grabbed my bag and keys and called the fire department after I got outside.
Good thinking.
I didn't want to be trap inside a burning house.
What was the damage?
I remember when I set the house on fire
you called the fire department really quick though
Thank goodness I did
You need to stop your fire fascination
I know, it's a problem
It really is.
I'm sorry I'm late. I was pulled over by a cop.
Well, the whole crew has been waiting for an hour.
There's nothing I could do. He wouldn't even let me use my phone.
This has been a complete waste of time.
Well let's get to work and stop wasting more time. I'm really sorry.
Places everyone. Let's go.
I screwed up big time at work. I was late!
Well, so what? You're NEVER late for work!
No. This time it mattered. I was late for a big meeting I was doing a presentation at.
Oh, man. That totally sucks.
Yeah. Robin had to wait for me before she could do her presentation. I explained to her that there was an accident on the highway.
Don't worry. You are not notorious for being late. I'm sure they understand.
I was late to work sorry about that.
I hear you have a reason for that.
Yea, it was my tire.
And an accident right.
Yea I got rear ended.
That sucks man.
I'm so sorry I'm late
Jordan, we had to cancel the meeting
I can explain really
It better be good
My wife went into labor and my phone died, I came here as fast as I could
Oh, well congratulations but you really should have found a way to call earlier
My wife is in love with another man.
What? How do you know that?
In the mail today there was a letter in her handwriting that said return to sender. It was handwritten in a fancy envelope so I opened it.
And what did it say?
It was a love letter to a man named Paul. She admitted that he was all she thought about. I don't know if he rejected the letter or it was the wrong address but it is currently in my car.
Wow, Alex. That is rough. I'm so sorry, man.
Wow, I feel guilty about reading this love letter.
Well, I think you should put it back where you've found it.
Its killing me. I want details of this relationship.
Dude, I get that, but leave it alone.
You're right. I was a male slut but I was just curious if he was better looking than me.
Really, at this point, who cares. Let it go man.
My wife has been cheating on me.
What?! Wait a minute...how do you know? Maybe she’s not.
I found a love letter to someone else in our outgoing mail that she brings to the post office.
Wow. What did it say?
Does it matter? She’s in love with someone else. So we’re done.
I’m sorry, man. That really sucks. You’ll find someone else.
I gave Sydney my paper for review yesterday.
Well what did she think? Did she have any good tips?
I'm not sure. She just marked it with an asterisk.
Perhaps she wants to talk to you about it later.
That might be it. I'll text her after work and see what's up.
I'm sure she has some advise for you on how to improve your work. She's a great writer!
Sydney put an asterisk on my paper today.
What is that?
I don't even know , but I need to ask Sydney.
Well it sounds like she did not like it.
She has the weirdest sense of humor.
I turned in my paper to Sydney so she can review it and give me feedback.
What did she write on it?
She marked it with an asterisk in red.
What does that mean?
That's what I asked her. She says it means it's got star quality.
Nice.
I had to go to my boss' office the other day. Her name is Kai.
Did she call you down there, or what?
No. I had to ask her about something for a meeting.
Oh, you had a presentation?
Kind of. I was running the meeting and wanted to make sure I had included everything I needed to on the agenda.
Oh. Got it. Hope the meeting was successful!
So I told you about Kai right?
That you guys work together?
Yeah, and today I had to go to his office.
Was he happy to see you?
I don't know, he was really professional, which is what I expected, but I also kind of hoped he would at least smile at me.
I'm sure he was happy, he just didn't want anyone at work to know.
Hey, I went to visit Kai at their office today.
Yeah? How did that go?
It was okay. Kai was getting ready for an important meeting, so we didn't have much time to talk.
That's too bad. Did you at least have a good conversation.
I think so. It was pretty short. Kai was really nervous about the meeting.
I can relate, I always get nervous before important meetings.
I just got off of work.
Were you alone?
No. I was working with Kai.
Were you in your office?
No.  I went to Kai's office.
Was it easier to work there?
I didn't realize how many types of microwaves there are now.
There are a ton of brands, were you buying a new one?
Yeah, my microwave broke so I went to the local shop to get one.
Which one did you choose?
I had to compare all of them they had, I chose the most advanced one I could get.
That's a smart move, you want to have all the features.
I am so glad to be back from our vacation, it was exhausting going around the world in such a short period of time.
How long was your vacation?
It was only a week but I really wanted it to be a month.
A month traveling around the world would be an amazing experience.
I know and I hope someday I have the money to do that.
You should really consider taking me with you!
I really did not want to come back home.
We all missed you, but you need a break from work.
Flying all around the world and taking a long term vacation was the best thing ever done.
What was your favorite place that you've been so far?
I would have to say that it was going to see the pyramids in Egypt.
There is something about seeing something that was created thousands of years ago still standing the test of time.
Had a nice vacation recently.
Really? What did you do?
I flew around the world.
That sounds amazing and fun.
Yes, it was fun, but it was too short.
Hopefully you get a longer vacation next time.
I met my brother's girlfriend.
What did you think of her?
I like her because she laughed at my jokes.
That was really nice.
I know I made a nice impression.
I hope my parents impress her as well.
Robin introduced me to his new girlfriend.  I finally met her.  She's been telling me everything about her.
What did you think about her?
I think she's a sweet girl.  I cracked a bunch of jokes to make her comfortable. I think I made a good impression on her.
That's great. It's good that you like her.
She'll be coming around the house a lot more. Robin seems pretty serious about her.
Robin falls hard for people.
My Brother Robin introduced me to his new girlfriend and I think I made a good first impression.
That's awesome. How did you do it?
I cracked a few jokes and made her laugh.
If you can make someone laugh, then you're in!
Yes. I'm so happy I have a good sense of humor, sometimes. Don't know what I'd do without it.
Bet your Brother was happy with that too!
So my brother introduced me to his new girlfriend the other day.
The one who looks like Gisele Bundchen?
Yeah. I asked her if Tom Brady knows she is going out with Robin.
Oh. My. God. That is hilarious.
Yeah. She laughed pretty hard.
That probably put her in a good mood.
Oh my gosh, these people are so poor!
Yea, they are.
I'm going to give them all of my money.
Whoa, whoa, that seems a kind of hasty.
There! I feel so much better! I only wish there was more I could do.
Oh Sydney, how are we going to pay for dinner now?
I feel so bad for people that are having a hard time
Guess they just got unlucky in life and bad things happened to them
I saw that homeless guy last week begging people for money on the corner
Did you give him anything?
No, I was broke at the time and didn't have any money
Hold up--I'm going to talk to them.
Don't talk with those homeless people.
I can't help it. They are so poor, I feel bad for them.
I can't believe you just gave each of them twenty dollars.
I can afford it. Don't you feel sorry for them?
They'll probably just use the money for drugs and alcohol.
It's your turn!
This card is awesome
Yea here's the other ones that are Pokémon.
Sweet wow you have a Pikachu.
Yea I have a Mew as well.
Awesome!
I love playing Gin. Don't you?
Yeah, I do. Your turn Tracy.
Oh. Sorry. She picks up a card and smiles. She lays down her cards. Gin
Wow. That was a quick hand!
Do you want to play again?
Sure. It's my deal.
My friends never pay attention when we play cards.
That sucks. Maybe they don't want to play?
Maybe. But I really enjoy it.
You have to think more about other people's wants.
I went to Grandma's today for the first time in a while!
How's she been? I don't think you've talked about her in a few months.
Yeah, it's been too long! We spent all afternoon in the kitchen, actually.
What did you cook with her?
Not cooked. Baked! We baked all sorts of delicious bread. Sourdough, pumpernickel, even baguettes! She has an entire setup that rivals any bakery you've ever seen.
Aww, you should've brought some here for me to try. Haha!
I want you to come over, me and Grams made bread!
Oh, really? What kind of bread?
Honey wheat, its seriously amazing.
I can't come over right now but save me some!
Okay, I'll save you a little bit. See you later.
Thank you, see you later.
I have a lot motivation to get this new client.
Anytime money is thrown at you, you got a bust your butt.
Getting this new client is going to take work but it’s worth it
Perhaps something else can come with a raise?
Like a promotion?
That’s exactly what I was thinking.
So ready to give me that raise?
Well you definitely earned it
Yeah I thought you wouldn't mind three new clients instead of one
One of them is even finalizing a deal as we speak
That's great, they are good people
And its really helping our company out
Austin told me I would get a raise if I got the new client.  That motivated me to work harder.
That would motivate many people.
It just gave me a reason to succeed.  There's a prize for working.
Compensation is the prize for working.
I think of everything like a game, including my job.
We have to get through it somehow
Sydney was so nice about the whole thing.
Did she seem sad?
No, she hugged me and everything!
That was mature of her.
Yes, we're best friends now.
That's good!
I went to a book reading today.
I didn't know they still do those.
They do indeed. It was at a small independent bookstore.
And do you just listen to the author read?
I also followed along in the book. Turning the pages when they did to keep up.
That sounds like something nostalgic people do.
Things have to be synchronized.
It needs to be.
I turn each page when the narrator does so we follow along with the story.
That is amazing.
Yes it really was.
I'm happy to learn new things.
I have to turn the page now
I am not done reading yet.
The narrator just turned the page too.
OK! I get
I need to follow along with the story!
This is a good read and it is easy to keep up with the narrator
When I read it the narrator seemed to read it too fast for me
I kept up pretty well and turned the page and never got behind
I guess you're a better reader than I am
I really like going to fundraisers, I just have so much extra money to spend.
I like going to them too. What type of causes do you generally like to support.
I support pretty much every cause at the fundraiser, they just all seem like they can do so much good.
Even the ones that seem to just waste money?
I have to spend all this money somehow and the parties are fun.
I get that but all of them seems kind of excessive.
I love making tea and my customers love it as well.
How much are you charging for tea at your store?
Not that expensive, it is like $1.50 for a single cup and $4 for a full kettle.
That isn't bad, I want to come by and try your tea sometime.
It is really good and I'm not just saying that because I own the place.
Come on, you kind of are saying that because you own the place.
I just got back from work. It was another pleasant day for me.
That's good to hear. Tell me a little about how it went.
My job at the cafe was relaxing and peaceful again. I enjoyed getting to serve our guests.
I really like that cafe. Their fresh drinks, their savory pastries and freshly baked muffins.
I recall serving this one customer. I heated a pot of water on the stove to make some fresh green tea.
I hear that's a favorite over there.
Hi how are you?
Good, how did you get that cast on your arm?
I was climbing that big maple tree in the back yard and I fell out of it.
Ouch is your arm sprained or broken?
It's broken, I heard a loud crack when I hit the ground.
That sounds painful!
I am on my way to the hospital. I think I may have broken my arm.
What were you doing?
You know I like climbing trees. I was sitting on a branch and fell.
I keep telling you to stay out of trees. You are too old for that.
I know that now. I heard a crack and my arm is killing me. I think it's broken.
Let me know when you know more. Call me if you need a ride home.
Hey Barb, how's it going? I met the Smith family down the street while I was out jogging. They're great people!
Yes, they are! I talked to them a few times, they're really sweet. Nice old couple.
They invited my wife and me over for some lunch later on in the week.
Oh, that's fantastic! My husband will fix some things for them from time to time, they're on a fixed income so money gets tight for them.
Yeah, they have to be pretty up there in age, the guy looks to be about 90.
I think they're both around 90, come to think of it. The husband was in the Korean war I think.
It was early but there were already people out running.
Where did you run?
I ran around the neighborhood I just moved into.  I met some nice people.  This couple were running too.
Cool you are making new friends.
They invited me to their BBQ next week.  I accepted because I feel like it would be a great chance to meet new people.
Sounds like people are welcoming.
I found a new friend in my neighborhood
you are new in that neighborhood, so how did you manage to have a new friend
I went out running one morning and I met a lady
Nice, maybe I'll move to your neighborhood
Oh!, that would be nice, you're very much welcome
okay, I'll think about it
I am starting to feel at home here now.
I am glad you are getting used to the area.
I actually made some friends while I was running this morning and we talked for an hour after we finished the run.
People around here are really friendly once you get to know them.
I feel a lot better about starting school now that I know some other people my age.
You are going to have a great year, don't worry!
Well that didn't take long, how did the interview go?
I think it went great! They said they will call me and let me know. Thank you so much for watching the kids
No problem, we had so much fun, we went to the new park on 4th, it really is pretty over there
Oh I am so glad you guys had fun, I knew I could count on you
Really anytime and good luck on the job front my friend, I hope they call you back soon
Me too,, you should have seen the view from the offices! Thanks again
How's the interview prep going, Riley?
Good, but can you do me a huge favor?
Sure, anything to help.
Can you take my kids to the park while I go to the interview?
Yeah, that would be fun!
Thanks so much!
Okay, are your kids ready?
Yeah, they are ready. Thanks again Kai for taking them to the park.
No problem, I am happy to do it!
I am so nervous for my interview.
Don't be nervous, I am sure you will do fine.
Okay, well I will pick the kids up on the way back from my interview, okay?
I was over weighted, when I weighted the scale tipped.
How many punds?
I was surprised I was 10 pounds over.
Sorry to hear that. Do you want to work out with me?
that sound great when can we start?
Today at 6pm meet me at the gym on mill St.
I weighed myself on my scale the other day.
What did it say?
I've gained a bit of weight.
You don't look that bad to me.
Well, I tipped the scales when I stepped onto them.
It does sound like you've gained some weight.
I weighed myself at the gym today and it was not good.
How much do you weigh?
Let's just say the scale didn't have a number high enough.
Well at least you were at the gym. How long did you work out?
I walked on a treadmill for an hour. I think I'll start doing that at least four times a week.
That sounds like a reasonable plan to tackle the problem.
Looks like I gained weight.
How do you feel about that?
Well, I'm kind of upset because I was trying to lose weight.
Well you only gained 5 pounds, there're a lot of opportunities to lose weight.
I hope so. I'll stick to my diet better this month.
That's the attitude!  Good luck!
I really can't believe that I have managed to put on this much weight.
I know, isn't it awesome how your hard work and training has paid off?
My dream of being able to fight against my biggest rival has finally come true.
Do you know how you are going to beat her?
I will throw all of my new weight behind my best uppercut.
I can't wait to see it, you know I am always in your corner Bailey!
I think I made a mistake walking to work this morning
Wasn't it really cold and raining outside
it was extremely cold and I got frostbite on my fingers
That sounds horrible
I hate walking to work. I need a car.
They're lots of money though.
I'm tired of walking in the rain.
Okay, just get a car then.
I am freezing!
How did you get to work today?
I had to walk and it is so cold outside!
I would've picked you up if you would've called me.
I tried to but my phone was dead!
I'm sorry, here is a sweatshirt to warm up a little.
I need to get a new job while being a student.
Hey have you considered making blankets from scratch?
I had not thought of that actually.
You are great at sewing, you should start a small business!
That sounds great actually, why don't we start one together?
Yeah, I will start doing some research and you can start working on the blankets.
I'm so happy I am able to work my way through college.
Is it expensive?
Yes, very expensive. And my scholarships don't cover it all.
How are you able to pay for everything then?
I make blankets at home and sell them.
Where did you learn to make blankets?
I should start selling these blankets I made.
You should, they look good.
Hopefully people want to buy them.
Why do you want to sell them?
I'm in college and need the money.
That's a good way to fund your education.
I got my scores today and I am the top rank in my class at cooking school!
Congratulations! I knew you were good at it.
I didn't think I would be that great. I just wanted to be a minor chef somewhere.
And now you see how good you really are!
I was tops in each class and each tasting. I can't believe it.
I hope you'll be a Top Chef TV star soon.
Who knew that I would love cooking.
You couldn't even boil an egg when you started.
I just found a passion that I enjoy. I never thought I would graduate at the top of my class.
You studied hard and found something you enjoy.
I finally graduated cooking school.
Congratulations! I know how good you were at cooking ..
It was pretty easy. And I graduated at the top of my class .
That's great. Now you can cook me a perfect cake.
I really love cooking but I was surprised I finished top of the class.
I'm not, you were always the best cook when it came to all the technical stuff.
There were others in my class who kept up with me though.
Your food is always so colorful and full of new ideas that is probably what they liked.
You are being too kind, there are others who could have been the top of the class.
No matter, you are and now you need to open your own cooking school!
I have always had this passion for cooking. I'm glad I gave in to going back to school.
Yeah, you've always been a great cook.
It just came naturally to me.
I'm glad you're my roommate because I can't boil an egg.
You are funny. I still can't believe I finished top of my class.
I can. Now we have to decide where you will do all this cooking.
I finally got a new car. Now I don't have to car pool anymore.
Congrats. Won't you miss your group?
Yes but I can leave when I want now instead of waiting.
I guess that was like taking the bus since you were on someone else's schedule.
I feel really free now too.
That sounds like fun. I hope you enjoy it!
I'll drive my car to the event.
You can ride with me.
No, I like to drive.
If you change your mind, just let me know.
Thanks for the offer.
Anytime, friend!
Hey, do you have any weekend plans Carson?
I don't want to talk about it, okay Kai?
Okay sorry, I was just asking to be nice.
Well leave me alone right now, okay?
Okay I will walk away.
I would really appreciate that right now. I just am not feeling well.
I was so mean to Carson. He asked me about my weekend when I was at my desk and I said to go away. He left after that and won't talk to me now.
Are you feeling ok? Carson was just trying to be nice.
I'm in a really bad mood . I just got a F on my test and I'm going to lose my part time job that I need. I'm broke.
That's a lot of problems to deal with. I can understand your being upset, but you should not take it out on him.
I know, but I just don't care anymore. Maybe I'll tell him and explain what's going on.
I was dating multiple guys for a year and was wondering if I choose one to settle down with.
What did you decide?
I decided I wanted to keep dating many guys.  I don't want to settle down yet.
Why settle down when you can have fun with whomever you want?
Exactly my thoughts.
You are wild and fun.  Stay that way.
I am thinking I should pick someone.
How many people have you been dating?
A few this past year.
Do you like one better than another?
I think I have it narrowed down to one.
Oh that's good, you should let the others know.
You should get down into your storm shelter as soon as possible.
Why do I need to do that? The weather report didn't mention anything unusual.
I saw a funnel cloud on the other side of town and it looks pretty dangerous.
Wow, how did you react when you saw that?
I tried to drive away and get home to safety as soon as possible!
That was a smart idea.
Today while driving I saw a funnel cloud on the other side of town. I had to leave town and it was impossible for us to avoid the cloud.
Did the cloud turn into a tornado or anything serious?
No, luckily it died down as we neared the cloud.
That's great, We have had terrible luck with tornadoes in the past.
I know, this town is built right down tornado alley, I can't believe people still live here.
Same, I've been thinking of moving for a few months now, I just need a new job in a new city.
Holy cow! Did you see that tornado forming earlier?
Yeah, I was at home in the basement with my family. Where were you?
We were at Matt's soccer practice, so we had to take cover in the mall on our way home.
Really? What was that like?
It was surreal. There were a ton of people there and it was super scary.
Well, I'm glad you're OK. Call me when you get home, OK?
We were almost caught up in a tornado.
Where did that happen?
I saw a funnel cloud on the other side of town.
That is so dangerous.
We did our best to try and avoid it.
That was a close one.
I spent most of day in the garden today.  I got sun burnt.
Ouch.  Did you put on sunscreen?
I did but I was out there for hours pulling up the daisies so that I can get the rose garden going.
That'll be so pretty when the roses bloom in the summer.
I planted different colors all over the garden.  I can't wait to see them in a few months.
Gardening is so rewarding.
While I was gardening today, I noticed the daises were too much!
Daisies  are beautiful.
Ohh! I know, I love roses more so I pushed up the daisies and planted some roses
You did a great thing then!
I did a lot of work changing things in the garden yesterday. I am trying to get roses in where the daisies are.
Do you have to dig them up or can you just plant them nearby?
I dug up the daisies actually. They can be transplanted and I want that spot for the rose bushes.
So you'll be able to have both and roses too?
Yes and I love this type of rose bush. It should bloom quickly in that spot.
Bring me a bouquet when you get them going.
I spent the weekend in my garden. You'll enjoy the roses that will bloom in the Spring.
I didn't know you grew roses. Last time I was over all I saw were those beautiful daisies.
We pushed up the daisies to make room for the roses.
Oh, what an interesting use of the idiom. Pushing up the daisies typically means that you are dead. But, you mean that you removed the daisies?
Yes, did I use the phrase incorrectly?
Well, as I understand the history of the phrase, yes. But, you did so colorfully and I know what you mean.
I was gardening and pushing up daisies so I can have room for roses.
Oh that sounds fun I really like roses
Me too I just love the color and look of them that I wanted to add them.
I thought about gardening but it seemed like a really big hassle
It is not that bad once you get use to doing it for a few weeks
seems to be something that you can do to really relax from the day just gardening
I hate it when my car has an issue!
What happened this time around?
It is having a problem and the headlights were not working.
Have you taken it for repair.
Yes! I took it into the shop
Okay!
Ugh, more car problems for me.
What happened this time?
Like nothing just my dumb headlights went out. I guess that happens, but it seems like one thing after the other with this car.
That's too bad. At least this is a normal thing. Headlights go out.
I hope they figure out what the issue is with my Jeep.
I'm sure it's something simple like a switch or a wire.
I feel like I looked at everything in the manual but I couldn't figure it out.
Don't worry, they will figure it out and they will charge you for it!
That's fine with me. I just want the problem fixed.
Well let me know how it goes.
People tell me I am the best player on the team and it can be hard to control my ego but I keep it in check all the time. I need to be a team player so we can win championships.
You are such a talented basketball player.  I love watching you play your games.
We have our final one this Friday night out in the field.  You should come to that one.
I wouldn't miss it,
You can cheer me on.
Most definitely.
We had a great game and I had 14 assists.
How many shots did you make? I don't know what assists are.
I scored 34 points. Assists is me passing the ball so my teammates can make shots.
You trust them with the ball?
I am the best player on the team but basketball is a team sport. I am making them better but playing as a team.
Teamwork is important.
I found out that new restaurant down the street from me finally opened up so I had to get everyone together and try it out.
How was the food?
It was really good and it seemed like everyone enjoyed the meal.
I know you would be there if it was trying something new.
Of course. You know how much I love trying new things.
I am going to have to try that place out since you say it is so good.
Hey, what are you doing tonight?
I don’t have any plans, why?
I saw there is a new restaurant open and would like to try it.
Hm, that sounds good. Let me check my schedule.
Great! Let me know.
I will check right now.
I love trying new things at restaurants. This new place opened up a couple of blocks from me so I asked my friends to join me for dinner.
How did you like the new restaurant?
It was great food at expensive prices.
What are their drinks like?
Stiff. The bartender just kept pouring. Good thing I lived just a couple of blocks away. We stumbled back to my house.
Good times.
I feel so guilty about what I did today!
What did you do?
I didn't have much time at lunch and I ended up having a cheat meal.
One cheat meal won't do much harm in the long run.
I know that, but it still just doesn't sit well with me, I should have packed lunch.
Don't stress too much over it, just set yourself a reminder for next time.
Well, I cheated on my fitness diet today.
Uh-oh. What happened?
I didn't have enough time to prepare my normal meal, so I had to grab fast food for lunch.
That's no big deal. You're so active that you'll work out those calories in no time!
I think I messed up my diet plan.
Did you eat something you weren't supposed to?
I ate fast food for lunch, I was in a hurry.
I don't think that's a big deal.
I've been strict with my health and fitness plan.
Just make sure to go back on it.
I brought the cutest little kitten home from the shelter today.  I dropped by the pet store to buy it a toy and a bed.
Have you given it a name yet?
I named it Snow.  It's white like Snow.
That's nice.  I want to meet Snow.
Pick me up for swimming tomorrow.  Let's introduce you to Snow.
I love kittens. I can't wait.
I just love my new kitten he is so adorable
I love the little heart on his little belly
that's the thing that made me buy him actually
are you going to give the kitten to Lisa for her birthday?
You know me too well
I just got the sweetest kitten from the shelter. I got her a new toy and bed so she'll be a happy kitty.
That's nice. What are you going to name her?
Alpha since she's my A number one first cat.
You are silly. But will make a great cat owner.
I just got myself a kitten from the shelter.
How is the kitten settling in?
I got the kitten a toy and a new bed when I brought it home.
I hope the kitten likes living with you.
I just got a new kitten
Really? How cute.
Yeah I just bought it a new bed and toy today after I got it from the shelter.
that's nice.
Yeah I can't wait to bond with it.
I'm sure it'll be your best friend
Oh man, the teacher is a little disappointed in me today and I don't blame her
Why, what did you do now?
I worked so hard on my assignment last night but I was in a rush this morning and I think I left my homework on the counter in the kitchen
Oh no, do you think the teacher is going to let you turn it in late?
I hope so! I did it, I was just too scattered brained this morning to remember to grab it!
Just ask for forgiveness and I am sure the teacher will be sympathetic
I think our math teacher is lenient.
He is not very strict I agree.
I forgot to bring my homework with me to school this morning.
Was he mad at you?
He was initially, but after an in depth explanation, he let me go with a warning.
You should be more careful next time.
I got your back girl.
I know.
We've been friends a long time.
Yes we have.
High school together.
Five years going strong.
Remember Skylar, the girl who works with me? She back-stabbed me today, claimed my ideas for the new sales campaign were hers.
Oh no.
Yeah, and it could cost me a promotion.  Trust me, I'll document every communication I have with her from now on.
That's a smart strategy.  I'm sorry she betrayed your trust.
That's what saddens me so. We were good friends for so long.
You're the best, Kendall, but sometimes people change their ways when we least expect it.
I took way too long at organizing today
didn't your boss wait?
Yes but they were impatient
You need to focus at one task at a time
Yeah that's a good strategy
If you think too much you will be slower
My boss is getting fed up with me.
That is not a good thing to hear.
I took a long time to organize my office at work.
And your boss was watching?
He was watching and he was waiting.
You'd better start looking for another job.
I don't know what to do
What's wrong?
I have to decide if I want to attend college here or go to New York
That's a tough one.
Yeah, I know. This decision could change my life forever
Whichever you choose, I still got your back
I have a big decision to make
What is it?
If I'm going to move to Europe to study
That can be life changing
I already think I'm going to do it
Go for it, it's an experience
I am thinking of moving to Paris.
Wow! That's a pretty big move.
It would be huge. It would mean giving up my job, selling my house, and moving across the world.
That's a life-changing decision.
Even if I ever came back to the US I would have to start over.
Well, starting over in the US would be easy compared to getting a life running in Paris.
I've got a big decision to make.
Where to go to college is important.
Especially because if I go to the East Coast, my relationship will most likely end.
Yes, long distance relationships rarely survive.
I think we're headed for marriage.  But who can pass up Harvard?
You face a life changing choice.
I have been putting so much energy into school trying to get good grades
How is it going? How are your grades?
They have been improving because I make sure I am there right at noon each day.
It's great you have been being punctual and focused. I am sure it will pay off.
It seems to be so far and I want to make sure my future is bright so I am going to keep it up.
I am proud of you.
I start school at noon
That's early for college night classes isn't it?
I'm taking day courses, I want to get good grades
Are you doing well in school?
Yes I want a good job so I'm making the best of it
You rock
I'm really committing myself to school now so I can get a career afterwards.
Agreed. Most businesses will only hire people with a good education.
My school doesn't start until noon, so I have plenty of time to prepare to make sure I get good grades.
Good thinking. Most of the A students I know study a lot before school begins.
I'm finally finishing up this paper to be published.
Nice, what is the paper on?
I looked into media effects on minorities during the pandemic.
Wow, that is super relevant right now.
I know. You've had some editing experience. Do you mind taking a quick look at it?
Sure, I'd love to give it a read.
I am so excited it's finally time to publish!
That's a great accomplishment.
Thanks. It has taken me a long time to get it done.
But you did get it done, how does it feel?
It feels great!
I can't wait to read what you wrote.
I'm going to celebrate tonight! My paper is finally ready to be published!
Congratulations! When will it be published?
I'm not sure of an exact date. I will submit my paper to the academic journal, and they will review it.
Remind me what the paper was about again.
I did a research study on the effects of gambling on mental health.
I definitely want a copy when it's published.
I'm heading off to the post office.
Oh, did you finish your work?
Yes, I'm sending in the finished manuscript.
I hope the editor goes easy on you!
Thanks, I worked hard on it over the past few months to make sure it was really well-written.
I'm sure it'll be great!
There has been a lot of stuff that happened overall
Right I know.  there is someone who is going into the ring but I forgot their name entirely
yeah there is a lot of names.  I think it is beck lynch
yeah I think he is known as the man
Yeah that is his nickname
yeah it is a weird name
That's the last MMA match I will ever officiate!
Why? What happened?
It started when I called for the contestants to enter the ring.  One of them would not enter until I called her by her stage name, the Man
the Man?  I thought this was a female fight.
Becky Lynch was her real name. Who knows what her sex was. All I know is that she pitched a fit because I used her real name. I'm getting too old for this.
I hear jello wrestlers are more congenial.  It's because they fight in a congealed medium.
I didn't let Sydney enter the door.
Good for you! She has no idea what's on the other side.
No, but I do. That's why I wouldn't let her pass through. She's not ready for it.
I'm glad you're looking out for her.
Somebody has to. She's getting reckless.
I really don't think you should step out of that door right now
Why, is their something dangerous on the other side
We dug a six foot hole so we could access the sewer pipes because they have a hole in them
well, I'm glad you told me before I almost died
I want to make sure everyone is working hard.
We all are.
Yea I'm nervous though.
We have a bad rep.
Yeah but that's why we need to work hard!
I gets you, don't worry we'll smash this!
I need to watch everyone because the instruction can be tricky
Do you have to be so close to them though
I have to peak over everyone's shoulders so they follow the instructions exactly
You really do have high standards
That is why I am the supervisor
Do you know if Austin's around? I left something in his room and the door's locked.
What did you leave in his room?
All my toys are in there. I was playing in Austin's room, but when I left I must have closed the door and locked it by accident.
Austin's at school right now. We'll have to wait until he gets home before you can get back into his room.
Hey Austin, opened the door!
Why what do you need?
We left our toys in your room, can we get it now please?
No, I'm trying to sleep. Come back later
Okay, I'm sorry to bother you
See you later.
I left my toys in Austin's room and now I can't get them back.
Why not? Will Austin not give them back?
The door to Austin's room is locked, so I can't get in to get them.
Surely someone can unlock Austin's door for you?
Austin is the only one with the key to unlock the door.
I guess you can get them back tomorrow then.
I don't think I'll get my toys back for a while
Where did you leave them yesterday?
I left them in Austin's room after we left
Why did you not just get them before leaving his house?
I tried but his door was locked
I see, maybe you can try again tonight after school
Hey Alex, want to see a movie later?
Don't you have a boyfriend?
Yes, he's out of town for the week.
I don't date girls with boyfriends!
We would just be hanging out as friends.
Have your boyfriend call me and tell me it's okay then, otherwise it's a NO!!
I've been thinking about our idea for the project.
Me too. I think it seems rather risky. I just didn't want to say anything because we just got the approval and funding.
I was actually thinking the same thing! Let's drop the idea and come up with an even better one.
You read my mind!
Glad we're on the same page. So what direction do you want to go?
Let me get my notebook. I have some things written down in there.
It always makes me feel good to do something to help others. I enjoyed providing that food.
Did you shop for it or use what was already in your kitchen?
There were 50 people in the shelter for meals. I had to shop for the food.
What did you make them?
I baked chicken, roasted potatoes and made vegetables. I also baked a few cakes.
Wow, that is all so generous of you. I understand why you feel so good.
I'm passing out food for people at the shelter, do you want to help?
Sure, is the centre near my house?
Yeah, we are going to help people who lost electricity during the ice storm.
Oh, that sounds nice, count me in! Do you need anything?
Thanks, I just need you to come on Friday!
Great! See you then!
There are a lot of people at the shelter.
Was the ice storm that bad?
Yeah, lots of people lost electricity.
Did they need anything at the shelter?
Yeah, we also provided food.
That's good they go to eat.
They always ask for a donation and usually I say no.
What made you change your mind this time?
This time I had extra money, so I thought why not.
That was nice of you.
I always want to give, just usually low on funds of my own.
Yeah, every dollar helps no matter who it's for.
Oh look, they're giving away candy if you donate to the Children's Network
Cool. Are you gonna do it?
Ya I want some candy. Do you want anything?
Ya, Let's grab a couple pieces
Hi, can I donate a dollar and get some candy?
Can we get 2 pieces of candy?
They had a bucket at the cash register to take up donations for the red cross.
Did you give a donation?
I ended up throwing a dollar into the bucket.
That was sweet of you. It helps people when they are in need.
Yeah, the red cross helped when we lost the house to the fire.
I don't understand trans rights.
I have a book that will help. Just right on this shelf--here you go.
Thank you, I will read it carefully.
These days things can be confusing.
That's for sure. One thing I can't get used to is calling people they.
I have trouble with that too.
This is crazy I need to stop waking up late for work all the time
Yeah you really do! It isn't good for you
No it isn't.  I am about to lose my job soon too
Yeah It is not ideal that's a fact
Yeah, I am already on such thin ice and I am extremely scared
Yeah I am sure that everything will work out fine
I can't believe I missed my alarm by an hour!
Don't you have to work today?
Yeah, I can't keep being late or I'm going to lose my job.
Sounds like you need a better alarm clock.
I do, but I won't be able to afford one if I get fired!
True.
I can't believe I slept through the alarm again and I'm late for work.
You were already late for work three times this week are you worried?
I'm on really thin ice with my manager and I hope nothing happens
I'm sure you will be okay since you're a hard worker
Morning, no time for breakfast, I have to run!
Why are you in such a hurry this morning?
I am an hour late, I slept through my alarm, I am in so much trouble!
Well I'm sure your boss will understand, that happens to all of us right
Yeh but it's already happened several times already!
You better get moving!
I wanted to go over the details of the assignment with you.
We have a month to put the presentation together.
It is going to take two weeks to grow just the plants for the experiment.
We can plant them at my house.
Did you hear about the fire yesterday?
I know, it's terrible, so much property damage.
Well that guy who owns that store kicked me out last week so I set his store on fire.
You did it!? I'm reporting you to the police.
You'd better not, I know where you live.
I don't like threats.
My mom is not happy about my move but this is my decision.
Why is your mom not happy?
She believes the group is a cult and I am headed for trouble.
A lot of people around here call them a cult. What do you consider them?
We are a religious organization spreading the gospel.
Ok. No complaints from me my friend. I just want you to be happy.
I'm sure you've heard the news by now from my parents?
No, Cameron. What is it?
I left home again. I'm living in South America now.
Wow, what prompted the move?
I joined another work group that matches my political ideology.
Carson, that sounds more like a cult...
No, I'm not with them anymore.
I thought you'd never leave them! Hooray!
I joined a different cult that's a lot better.
Oh, where are you living now?
We moved to another country entirely: Guyana.
In South America; that's pretty far away from home.
I think I've found my purpose in life.
What purpose is that?
I've joined a new cult and moved to another country.
Don't you think that's drastic?
No, I've found what I've meant to do.
If it makes you happy.
I know I can be a bully sometimes.
What happened this time?
I was teasing Addison.
Did you touch her?
I put my hand to her face.
That is just plain wrong my friend.
I finally found what I was looking for!
What did you find and where?
I found the money that people put into the little fountains at the mall
That's exciting. was it hard to find?
yes I had to look very thoroughly for half a day
that's a lot of time but sounds fun
I feel so lucky today!
Why do you feel lucky?
After searching the fountains in the mall, I found a five dollar bill.
That’s cool, what will you do with the money?
I am going to buy lunch with it in the food court.
Sounds delicious, maybe I should join you.
I need to find the phone.
Where did you lost it?
I think I lost it somewhere here in the snow.
Don't worry, I will help you find it.
Thank you so much, It's very important for me.
Hey! Addison I found your phone!
You need to deposit every dollar of your investment.
We need this project to move forward.
I don't work hard enough.
Ok, I'm just not as committed.
It's time to get committed.
Ok, Bailey.
Alex and I started this business together and it worked out wonderfully.
It really did, I love coming to this store.  So it was easy to get started?
No, in the beginning Alex didn't feel safe investing nearly as much as the company needed to function, so I had to make him deposit every dollar we had into this place.
Well it seems like you knew what you were doing, this is the most popular place in town.
We do ok. It's because of perseverance and hard work, and of course, we had to put a whole lot of money into the place in the beginning.
I'm glad you did, this place is my favorite out of all the places in this city.
I got Alex to make a deposit today into our business account.
Do you need to use it for something special?
Our project is moving forward and we need more financing to keep it going.
Well I am glad he is contributing so you can get it done.
I think we'll be able to continue now.
Congrats! I hope you get it done.
I can't believe Addison tried to punch me.
I saw that your quick reflexes made her miss.
Yeah, I played a lot of sports in college.
That's cool.
Yeah, I love sports.
Me too.
Oh my God. Addison threw a punch and missed hitting me by only a few inches.
Why in the world would he punch you?
We were practicing for the boxing match in the gym.
Oh. Sounds dangerous.
Well, my first match is Saturday if you want to come.
Ok. Cool. Just promise me you wont get hurt too much, ok?
I really hope you find the perfect purse because you earned it
Yeah I am just going to need to spend a little time here and there
Yeah there is really not a large selection of purses so hopefully it wont take to long
Yeah I hope it doesn't take too long either
It is such a blessing to have you in my life
Thanks
I'm a doctor who is into left feet.
Oh that's interesting.
Yea I treat all things
Come on let's go.
Okay great.
Awesome!
Can you give me a hand putting away the tent?
Sure, what do you need me to do?
Here, take these stakes I just pulled out and put them in the stake bag.
OK, do you want me to help you fold the tent too?
Yes, please. Let me take off this rain fly first.
Alright, I'll help you fold that up too.
You know about the writing competition.
Yes, of course,  you won the big prize.
Well, I've been getting praise from everyone.
Like who?
My English teacher, the principal, the librarian, and even Jennifer.
Jennifer--now that's interesting.
It was great to get praises from everyone today.
You deserve it after winning the competition.
I tried my best to write the best story I could.
You’re an incredible author and need to keep going at this
I’m gonna keep writing until I become famous
Make sure you include me in one of your novels
I can’t believe I won the writing contest.
I can, you are an amazing writer.
I don’t think I am better than over 100 other people though.
Well the judges thought so and that is all that matters.
I might enter another competition because that gave me a bit of a confidence boost.
A bit? Man you are the most humble guy ever.
I am so proud of winning first place in that science fiction writing contest.
Yeah, I read your story, it was so good I didn't stop reading until I finished it.
Thanks man, everyone's been really supportive, I even got a card signed from the whole English department.
That's great, I know they must be so proud of you.
Yeah, my teacher said she is gonna have our whole class read it next week.
She must really like it then, she's very particular about what she has students read for her classes.
Can you help me carry these boxes to my car?
Sure Tracy. What's in the boxes?
Oh, just some odds and ends I need for the store I'm opening this weekend!
Your'e finally opening up your store. That's wonderful news Tracy!
Yes, I got the big loan I've been waiting for and things are looking good for me.
Of course I'll help. Hey are you looking to hire any new employees?
We grew up poor.
Yeah we did too. How did you end up making your money?
The mustard sauce recipe that my grandmother passed down to me.
So you sold the recipe?
No, I start making small patches and selling them at the fair, and a guy in the business offered me a contract.
So by making the small batches?
I finally found something I want to do in my life and started a successful business with it.
What is the business?
I write business plans for people and offer advice for them in creating the business.
That sounds cool, how many clients do you have so far?
I already have three plans I need to write by the end of the month.
That is awesome! I bet you are so happy.
Hey, did you hear about all those homes on the next block getting robbed last week?
Yes, I did.  My friend's house got robbed Thursday.
I decided to buy a brand new burglar alarm so my family will be safe.
That's great!  Do you like your new alarm system?
Well...before I could install it, my house got robbed and they stole my new alarm.
Wow!  So now what are you going to do?
I got my new burglar alarm installed this morning.
I'm sure you will feel a lot safer now that you have a security system.
I hope so! All the burglaries in my neighborhood lately have made me really afraid.
I'm wondering if I should get one, too. Are they expensive?
Not really. I'll pay $30 a month for the monitoring, and the alarms were free.
I think I can afford that.
I asked Tracy a question about the project because I missed class yesterday.
Where did you go?
I had a dental appointment.
Was that painful?
It wasn't bad. I had a filling and the dentist took care of me and numbed me really well.
That's good.  I know you can't stand pain.
Tracy what is your understanding of the second part of the project?
I got the same information as you but I think that part is to be typed out in summary format.
Ok. That's how I understood it too. I hate hearing instructions second hand.
Same here but we couldn't be in two places at one time.
No we couldn't. I'm going to start on my project today.
So will I. No more procrastinating for me.
How many pages did the report have to be for the project?
Forty five! Believe me I would like to forget too!
Oh I didn't forget, I wasn't there Monday when the guidelines were presented
Oh that's right, I remember, you were having fun at the dentist!
Haha not funny, that root canal really hurt
I am sure it did but his 45 page report might just hurt a little more hahaha
Could you give me some details about the upcoming project?
Sure. Were you not in class?
No, I had to miss class because of a doctor's appointment.
I see. You are supposed to join a group and make a presentation on your geography topic.
Is there some group size limit?
Four to five. You can still join our group if you want.
I have to convince Alex to join me in this mission.
Have you two worked together before?
Yeah, we've been successful in the past and enjoyed working together.
So what's the problem for Alex?
He lacks confidence, so it can be hard to convince him, but I'm sure I can persuade him.
It sounds like you know just what to do.
I don't know why so many girls hate being around me.
They are just jealous of your good looks and ability to attract men.
I mean, it's not my fault I look so good.
Maybe you can tone down the ego a bit though.
I don't have an ego, I don't need an ego to be as successful as I am.
Yeah, that right there is called ego.
They are just jealous that the men want to talk to me.
You just get them all riled up when you dance.
I can't help I dance better than they do.
You should try talking to them or sharing some of your tips with them.
I made that money, I won't give them any of it.
Just a thought to have them not gang up on you and throw you out of the club.
No one at work hangs out with me.
Why? You're an amazing person.
Someone at work said I am a flirt and others are jealous because I get all the attention.
That's definitely not your problem.
I know but it still hurts.
I get it but you still have me as a friend.
I having so much fun at this party!
Taylor! You're playing with fire and I don't like what you're doing!
You're just jealous of me and my looks.
I am a little jealous but you're going to hurt some of these guys and it will come back on you.
Men deserve it. They just want one thing.
Some. But there are nice guys out there.
I cannot help how pretty I am!
Yes, but you could dress more conservatively.
I want to show off my body.  I can if I want to!
I know, but you are sending the wrong signals.
If someone wants to think something that isn't true, that's on them.
I'm just saying but to each their own.
I know the neighbors think I'm weird, but I don't care. I love raising that flag every day.
Yes, I don't think you've missed a day yet. It's impressive.
I pride myself on my patriotism. Plus it helps me learn a little something about our neighbors.
Really? What is it that you're learning?
I keep an eye on who salutes the flag or not. Lets me know who the patriots are on this block.
As a loyal American, I have to tell you how proud I am of you.
You know that I consider Quinn my real dad, right?
But he isn't your real dad.
That's nonsense. He has been there for me when I really needed him.
And your biological dad was never there for you.
Right. How can I ever consider that person a dad when they never raised me?
I understand completely, and Quinn is a great role model for you.
Dad, can you take me fishing?
Yes Alex. Why do you keep calling me dad? You know I am not your real father.
You are the closest thing to a father I have ever had. I am very grateful for you.
That is too kind of you Alex, thank you.
Of course, dad.
I don’t understand why people have an issue with this.
I think it’s a bit unusual for them to have an issue with it as well.
This is the person that has taken up that role for me.
You have every right to call them whatever you need to.
I mean they are the father that I know and I’m gonna keep calling them that for the rest of my life
Do what you have to do in order to be happy.
Did you know that Quinn is not my biological father?
That's surprising! I always assumed that he is.
He adopted me as a baby. Now I just call him my father.
You two must be quite close.
I love him deeply. He means a lot to me.
I bet he loves you too.
I went shopping with mom.
That is not good.
I picked out the perfect item.
What could go wrong?
Mom liked a different item and you can guess the results - we bought the worst possible item, her choice.
Next time, I suggest you go shopping alone.
I bought this new spaghetti sauce and it looked great on TV but it tastes awful!
Oh no! Is it spoiled maybe?
No the expiration date is a month from now
I'm so disappointed; I was excited about how great it might taste and everyone says they love this brand
Maybe you got the wrong flavor
Maybe but I'm still never buying this brand again
At the store today, I looked thoroughly before selecting the items.
Were you able to select the best items?
I thought I did but I ended up picking the worst possible items somehow!
You can return the items.
I feel a little guilty for cutting off a driver today.
Why would you do something stupid like that?
I was frustrated, because I was in a hurry to get home after such a long day at work, and the car in front of me was moving at a snail's pace.
That's no reason to cut them off. That's dangerous.
I know. Originally I was just going to pass the other car as quickly as I could, but then I decided to cut them off too.
Well, karma might come back to bite you the next time you drive.
I got pulled over but it was really stupid.
Why did you get pulled?
I passed a car in a no passing zone.
Why did you do that?
I was in a hurry and they were going too slow.
I guess I understand that.
I'm running late.
I see that you are in a hurry.
Did you see how fast I passed the other car that was lagging?
Yeah, drive carefully Remy.
Drive faster! Get out of the lane!
Slow down!
No! I am in a hurry to get home!
I am going the speed limit!
No you are not! You're going way under it!
All my two kids did is fight all day long yesterday!
That can be so annoying. It doesn't sound like they're fighting now.
That's because I separated them for the day.
How did you do that?
I made one clean the kitchen and the other clean the living room.
I bet they will think twice about fighting next time!
I gotta divide and conquer.
Interesting strategy.
Yeah I put one in the kitchen and one in the living room .
I saw that.
My kids were acting crazy today. Fighting all day long. I have such a headache.
I only have one so I don't have any advice for you.
That's okay. I put one in the kitchen and one in the living room. Told them not to move.
Did it work?
It did, until dinner time. Then they started arguing again. Next time is no phones, computers, or video games.
I hope it'll work.
I had to separate the kids after their fight.
How vicious did the fight get?
It was so bad that one had to stay in the living room and the other in the kitchen.
What was the fight over?
I actually don't remember, but can you imagine things getting so bad their own father couldn't immediately break things up?
How close in age are those kids again?
My kids were driving me up the wall yesterday.
But they're usually pretty well-behaved.
I know, but they kept fighting with each other and it even got physical at one point.
Wow, how did you break up the fight?
I kept them apart by having my daughter in the kitchen and my son in the living room.
It was smart of you to give them space to cool off.
Bailey gave me a surprise
I thought they were out of town?
they came back just to treat me to dinner
Thats the best birthday!
I'm so happy with this
I hope it was nice as expected
For my birthday I was really spoiled by Bailey.
Tell me about it!
Bailey travelled here and took me to the new restaurant downtown.
That place seems so good! I'm a bit jealous.
It really was a pleasant night.
Yes, and now I want to go to that restaurant as well!
I had a really nice evening with Bailey.
Did you do something nice?
Bailey wanted to spoil me for my birthday, so he planned a date at a restaurant and invited me. He traveled there and I joined the dinner.
That's sweet, you'll have to do something nice for his birthday or he will be disappointed.
He won't.
It will have to be nice so he's happy too, let me know if you need suggestions.
I didn’t realize searching for health insurance was so tough.
The thing is that there are so many options on the market.
A lot of them are great though.
But you have to weed through all the bad ones to find a good one.
A good win that’s not gonna take all of your money.
Exactly, insurance companies love taking all of my money.
I have been analyzing some heath insurance options.
Have you settled on anything yet.
I'm not in any rush. I want to weigh all options very carefully.
You are good with spotting great deals.
It takes hard work and patience.
Let me know if you need any suggestions from me.
I had a great date last night with Lee.
What did you guys do?
We went to a night picnic under the stars on the beach and then went for a long walk and ate some ice cream.
Very simple and sounds fun.
Had great conversation and some great food which is all I can ask for.
I’m sure they’ll be many more date nights for you to in the future.
Lee is so romantic. We had such a great date last night.
What's that paper you're looking at?
It's a ToGo menu from the restaurant we went to last night, and the cork from our wine bottle.
You took them as keepsakes? And in that picure, is Lee resting his head on your shoulder?
Yes. See here, I've also got the ticket from the movie we saw. These are keepsakes indeed.
I think it's very romantic that you're saving the souvenirs from your night together.
I'm so happy that I am finally pregnant.
Wow, that is awesome! How did you find out?
Well, I just took a pregnancy test.
I guess that was a dumb question. Awesome!
Yea, I got the results and immediately called my mother.
Oh wow, I bet she was so excited to hear from you.
I did a pregnancy test and my results came back positive.  I was so excited that I called my mother the minute I found out.
Congrats.  You guys have been trying for so long.
This is such a blessing.  I have almost given up hope.
It's a miracle.
The doctors told me they didn't think I can conceive naturally.
Anything is possible when it comes to the human body.
So I called  my mother to tell her I was pregnant today.
How was her reaction?
She was totally thrilled.
Even though you are not married?
Well she would have preferred if we had married but she is fine with it.
Well it's great that you have such a support system.
I was outside taking the trash out and I found a bunch of kittens in the dumpster.
Oh wow, are you going to keep them?
I don't know there is a bunch of them and I don't know what I should do with them.
Maybe you can put an ad up online or something and get some people to adopt them.
That is a good idea, I think I'll try to find them all good loving homes.
If that doesn't work you could always call the SPCA.
I just found a litter of kittens in my garbage can outside.
That is a strange place to find kittens.
I can't figure out how the mama cat got in there.
Do you think someone put them in there?
I hope not. I called a volunteer society. I don't know what to do with them.
Maybe take them to the local shelter?
Look what I found. Isn't this unbelievable?
Oh wow! Are those kittens? Where did you find them?
They were in the trash bin, if you can believe it.
The trash bin? How can people be so cruel?
It's hard to fathom. These poor little guys.
I'm so happy you took the trash out when you did.
I had to collect everyone's phones since no one followed rules.
Really Kendall? Jesse said she had an emergency message from home.
You know, they are supposed to call the office, not her directly.
Even when it is an urgent call?
Yes, especially since that was her eighth emergency this week. She even tried to use my phone.
I see why you had to collect all the phones to have your students stop using them.
Nobody can use my phone.
Sounds like you're very jealous of your stuff.
Jess can use it though, she's the only exception.
That's nice of you.
She is an amazing friend, that's why.
That's how friendship work, isn't it?
I wish making this job change decision wasn't so hard for me.
What is so hard about it. You hate your current job, don't you?
I don't hate it per se but the money, location and type of work need to be considered in this decision.
Make a pros and cons column and get to writing.
That is a good idea. That will help me a lot with this decision since I had three offers already.
It's simple but never fails me.
I was thinking of starting a new job. I have three offers to choose from.
Oh really? What about the one you already have?
I don't like it anymore. I was considering which job to take since each job is different in terms of pay and type of work.
I see. Just pick the one with higher pay for the location.
Yeah, I am trying to determine that so I can make a decision.
You do have three options so I'm sure its not easy to pick from them.
I'm thinking about starting a new job.
Did you get any offers?
I've had three offers, but they all had issues.
What kind of issues?
Pay, location, type of work. I'm considering all of them.
Best of luck to you!
I want to start a new job.  I am tired of where I am at.  There are three different offers I am considering and they each have their issues.
How many job offers did you receive?
Just three.  This is an expensive city.  I have to work really hard to make it here.
Are the jobs close to where you live?   I would consider the distance because of commuting too.
Two of them I can do remotely, so there's only one that I need to show up at physically.
That's nice.
I had to meet with one of my employees today. They didn't want to do inventory.
Yuck I always hated doing inventory. I don't blame them.
Yeah but I am his boss and he needs to follow my instructions. We just had our Black Friday sale and I need to check our numbers.
Who was it? Are you going to fire them?
Taylor of course. He's so lazy. No, I'm giving him one last chance. He apologized and said he's going though some personal issues.
Well, that's understanding of you. I hope it works out.
I can't believe Sasha kept trying to copy my homework in class today.
What did you do?
I just kept putting my books on top of my homework so she couldn't see it.
Did it work?
Yeah, because I would just rest my elbow on my book.
She really does need to start doing her own homework.
This class isn't so bad, I enjoy doing the homework.
Are you kidding? This homework is the worst.
Nah, it's not that bad. But I didn't like that Sasha tried to copy my homework.
And did you let Sasha see yours?
Nah, she has to do her own work.
Yeah, Sasha should not rely on you that much.
Man, you should see how crazy the store is right now!
Oh yeah, I bet a ton of people are there collecting supplies.
Including me! I thought I was getting in before the rush but that was definitely not the case.
Luckily we have a lot of stuff already stocked away for hurricanes and such.
If we were smart we would have thought that far ahead, but I guess we're stuck competing with everyone else for the basics.
Hopefully this hurricane won't be too bad. You can always stock up before the next one!
I'm still feeling the flu symptoms and my fever hasn't died down.
Have you got the prescription from your trip to the doctor's office? I heard that Jan took you there.
I just picked up the prescription at the drug store and am taking the medicine.
Sometimes it takes a little bit before it kicks in.
Yeah, I hope it happens soon because I don't feel great at all.
Don't worry, Jan and I will take care of you during this time.
Oh man I feel so sick. I'm so happy jan was here for me and took me to the doctor earlier.
Jan is so reliable.
Yea, she is. I got meds to treat the virus and Jan also came with me when I picked up my prescription.
Jan really is a life saver.
I feel horrible. I've been in bed since Jan took me to see a doctor.
What do you have? The flu?
Yes, I got some meds prescribed and came home, took my medicine and went to bed. I've been here since.
I hope you feel better. I'll call you tomorrow to check up on you.
You know how Robin's phone has that phone finder app?
Yeah, what about it?
Well I saw how it works. She couldn't find her phone and borrowed my device to use the app to find it.
Why didn't she just call the phone?
It was dead, the app can find a phone that is not charged.
Oh, that's cool.
Taylor oh Taylor.
Yeah she is really commited to ensure you study correctly.
I'll be honest. It's working and I'm getting better at school.
I noticed, good job!
Thanks.
Taylore has really beenstrictt on me when it comes to my studies.
I think he just wants to see you do well.
I understand. But sometimes it gets a little tiring.
How has your grades been?
My efficiency at school has increased.
Seems like he knows what he's doing.
My grades have really improved lately.
I'm glad to hear your studying has paid off.
Well, I really owe it to Taylor. Taylor's been tutoring me since he wants to make sure I'm studying properly.
What study tips has he taught you?
He's taught me to outline and highlight my notes. I've gotten a lot more efficient with my schoolwork.
I think Taylor should be a teacher when he grows up since he's so good at tutoring.
Taylor has become like my drill sargent
He is right,  you need to pick up your grades a bit
i do, and i know I've been slacking
Well, luckily he is helping you now
And I am grateful for that, I needed some direction. My grades got better and I'm more efficient now.
Now just get those grades up
I have this contract that I would like my kids to abide by.
That is a great idea, are you going to share it with them today?
I am going to give it to them in terms they can fully understand.
Great, sounds like a good plan to help them understand.
I sure hope so, I really need their help.
I'm sure everything will be fine, and they will understand the contract.
I've had to explain a contract to my children, so I made it easy to understand.
Simple is the best way.
I agree.
Good to see we are on the same page.
I tried to explain the contract I just signed to my children.
Were they able to understand it?
Yes they were.
How did you explain it to them?
I simply used terms that they could understand.
That makes sense. Your children must be really smart.
I hate when my brother listen to music and it's so loud we can't even talk!
Yeah, makes sense.  Does he do that often ?
Relatively often. He did it today, and I had to scream lounder to be heard. 
yes, I understand. And then how did it go?
Overall we had a nice talk, but only after I had to keep screaming louder and louder to get his attention.
Well at least you managed at the end.
My brothers music was so loud I had to scream.
Why didn't you just ask him to turn it down a bit?
I did a couple times, he really just didn't care.
That is not very nice, maybe you should give him a taste next time he comes to talk to you.
We both just had to raise our voices louder and louder as the music got louder.
That is no way to have a conversation with someone, you should talk to your brother about how it made you feel.
I couldn't hear anything in here this morning.
I know. I asked your brother to turn the music down but he didn't want to.
I know, when he does that you can only try talking louder.
Sorry if it sounded like I was shouting.
No problem. Let's talk now by the way.
Yeah, but let's go outside.
I think I might have to find a laundromat on the street.
Why? You have one in the building.
It's four flights up and  down and the basement is dark and damp.
Oh, you think it's easier to go to the street store?
It doesn't feel like it's a cleaning spot when it's dark and damp.
I get that. If you find a well lit one, it might be a good idea to switch.
I've been looking forward to taking Kai to lunch for his birthday yesterday.
I'm sure he has been waiting all week long as well so you could catch up.
I've been really busy with work, but it feels better when you're looking forward to something.
At least you had a couple hours to kick back and relax.
I've missed Kai a lot. We used to have so much fun.
I think you need to get together more often.
I am so glad Kai could come with me to get something to eat
Kai told me he had been waiting to have lunch with you all week
i really wanted to try out the spaghetti hamburger with meatballs
I hoped you enjoyed your lunch together and that food was good too!
Ok so yesterday Kai and I tried this new restaurant out to see if the reviews are spot on!
I know , Kai was so excited and had been waiting all week for your lunch together.
Me too, I thought about it every day at work, it was a long week!
If the smell when you pass the restaurant is any indicator, the food must be amazing there!
It was good indeed, and everyone was so nice
I see, I look forward to trying it out soon!
The tables were soaking wet from the rain.  It took me several minutes to dry them and the chairs for our picnic.
Where were you?
We were at the park by my parents' house.  People were all ready there and ready to eat.
Did the rain stop?
Fortunately, it did.  The sun even came out when we were leaving.
It's so unpredictable here.  It could rain any time.
The rain stopped in time for the picnic but it was pretty wet.
Did you have anything dry?
I dried off the tables and chairs well enough and we still managed  to grill the burgers.
So it was a success anyway?
Yes, we didn't get to play some of the games because of the wet grass but it was fun.
I'm glad it stopped in time.
Oh my gosh. It's raining.
Right before the picnic. Everything is wet.
Don't worry. I will dry the tables and chairs.
I will help you with that.
Thank you. This will take several minutes to finish.
Everything will be done in a second.
Yesterday it rained cats and dogs. It almost ruined our picnic experience
Sure, I remember I was also supposed to go to the mall but I postponed the trip
Well, It did not stop us from holding a picnic. Right after the rain I dried the table and chairs and we carried on as if nothing happened
Wow! you and your friends are quite adamant
Well, we never let anything ruin our fun
Absolutely
Can you hand me that towel?
It's a good thing it stopped raining before the picnic.
Yeah, it is. But it would be nice if it didn't rain yesterday.
Or if the park covered their furniture or put it in storage when it is not being used.
That would require a lot of work. It only takes me a few minutes to dry off the tables and chairs.
That is true. You are a good person, Cameron.
The market has given me a large spot to sell my art.
I am so proud of you and how you are raising money for kids in the community, Austin.
I remember when I was one of those kids, and just want to give back.
Do you need me to help you to set up tommorow?
Yeah, I could use the help, you don't mind?
No, it's for a great cause and I enjoy helping you.
Hey there, how's it going? I just raised a bunch of money for a local charity.
Really? That's great! Which one are you supporting and how did you raise it?
I sold my art! I'm going to give it to children in need. I really think it could make a difference.
Good for you. I'm happy to see people doing things like this.
We sold all the art pieces this weekend.
Wow, how much money did you guys raise?
Altogether, $10,000. I will donate the money to a charity that works for the children in the community.
That is so amazing, I’m very impressed.
I didn’t think it was gonna turn out that well either.
Anytime you do anything it turns out amazing.
I think I was mean to my friend earlier today.
It can happen sometimes, especially on a bad day.
I'm sorry I said that. I really wanted to take it back.
I understand. You were angry, but you don't have to call your friend names.
I didn't mean what I said earlier.
Say What? Alex what are you talking about?
What I said back there to my friend. About his girlfriend. I didn't mean it.
It's okay. I'm sure he's over it.
Do you think my friend will forgive me?
Of course he will.
I love our history class.
Our teacher is great and makes me so interested in what happened in the past.
I agree! I love how our teacher says history always finds a way to repeat itself.
The teacher said she will show us how this has happened before.
I want to see the evidence of this. Very interesting if this is true.
People never learn from their past mistakes.
You missed a great lecture in history today. I really enjoyed it.
What was it about?
Well, it was mainly about history always repeating itself.
Oh, that sounds interesting. I'm mad I missed class now.
I'm sure we'll hear similar lectures soon. It really did make me want to learn more about history though.
You should ask the teacher to recommend you some good books to look into.
I write for a TV show and am so busy these days, I mostly work in a writers room.  We are developing the show for the new season.
You've always been a great writer.
It's a cool job.  I get to be creative and develop new characters and bring them to life.
You give them their personalities.
And actions and speech.
Without you, they are nothing.
I never liked them even though they tried to be my friend.
Why don't you like them?
They are so fake.  All they care about is what they wear and how popular they are at school.
That's what's important to them.
That's not what I value so I rather not be friends with them.
You will find like-minded people in time.
I don't like pushy people
Do you have anyone particular in mind?
There is a group of people at work who try to get me to hang out with them but I just don't want to.
Are they nice to you?
They are nice, but they try too hard to be friends and I don't have anything in common with them.
Sometimes it just doesn't work out I guess.
OMG, I feel horrible. I should have worn my coat.
I don't think it was the weather that got you sick. It was the bad goulash.
But that was organic goulash! I think it was the cold rain.
I worn my parka but got sick too. Its the goulash!!
Okay, next time we'll do borscht instead.
You beetcha!
I was pretty stupid yesterday.
What did you do this time?
I refused to wear a coat in the rain.
Why did you do that?
I don't know, but I got sick and had to rush into the bathroom to puke.
Well, you should have worn a coat, but I don't know how that related so soon to getting sick and puking.
I feel like garbage. I got sick in the bathroom after I walked in the rain.
I don't think something from the rain would make you sick like that, immediately.
I agree. Some said it was because I didn't wear a coat in the rain.
I'll have to respectfully disagree. Is there anything you want or need?
I showed Kai's daughter my new dog.
Oh, did she like it?
Yeah, but I don't think that Kai is happy with me.
Why not?
Now her daughter is asking her to buy a dog.
Oh, kids do love puppies!
My dog met Kai's daughter, Valerie, today.  They became friends. They were both so excited to play with each other.
How fun.
The dog had just taken her bath so she was very clean.
I love it when dogs are clean.
I bathe her all the time because she sleeps with me.
My dog sleeps with me too.
I knew that Kai’s daughter would love the dog.
Little kids love dogs.
Little kids, big kids, adults and people of all ages love dogs.
There are a few people that don’t.
They probably just never had a dog and don't know.
They should all try in my opinion.
Kai Daughter came over to my house yesterday
The first daughter?
Yes! I showed her my new dog, she was so excited
she really loves pet.
Yes, I know.
Had a great day at my grandparents farm today.
You're so lucky to get to visit their farm, how was it.
So much fun, we got to feed all the animals, and help collect the eggs from the hen house.
I would love to come with you next time, I love feeding animals
I bet you would love to come help us milk the cows, you feel so productive when you see how much milk you get from the cows.
I would, definitely let me know the next time you go, I would love to help.
Hold on for a minute, since I need to help Tracy get dressed.
How much longer will I need to wait for?
It'll only be a few minutes. I just pulled Tracy's pants up.
You should teach her to do it herself.
Well, she can't, since she's only two years old. She's way too young to do it herself.
I would lose my patience so much if I were a parent!
You know that thing Mike told me?
No, what are you talking about?
Well he told me he likes a girl named Meghan. But he didn't want me to tell anyone.
What? Then what are you telling me for?
I don't know, I just felt like I had to share it with someone, get it out into the world.
That's weird, come on man. You don't do that.
Thanks for coming to my son's birthday party yesterday!
No problem, I'm just sorry I had to leave early. Did I miss anything?
Not much, just him opening his gifts.
Oh, but that's the best part! What did you get him.
I got him a handmade chess set since he's been getting really into the game lately. You should have seen the look on everyone's faces when he opened it.
Wow, that really sounds like something. I have to come by and play with him some time.
The party turned out great!
The bike you got your son was so nice, everyone one loved it.
I just wanted him to have something special on his big 10.
You worked those extra shifts and he knows you love him.
The gift I gave my son for his birthday last week was a big hit.  All his friends were impressed and want one.
What did you give him?
I have him a skateboard.  It has all these cool new features.
That's a great gift because it gets him out of the house and some exercise.
Exactly, that was what I was going for.  I didn't expect his friends would like it so much.
Did you hear about my new job?
I heard a little bit about it.
It pays good and I get a lot of vacation days.
Sounds like a place I need to work at.
They are hiring.
Send me anything that I can fill.
So I think I am going to take a new job
Oh, how exciting! Where is it at?
It's at the firm across town.
What does that mean for this firm?
Well I am going to find someone to run it that will treat everyone well
That's thoughtful of you.
I am so tired of spending so much time with the drama group.
I thought you liked being a part of that.
I did and still do. It's just too much. They're just overbearing with their desire to act like Streep.
I think it would be fun being in a drama class.
Only if you're as serious about it. I have to avoid the stage just to get away from them. Then they get annoyed.
I'm not going to perform on stage tonight. I just need to spend some time alone.
Makes sense. Everybody needs me time sometimes.
Yea. I don't care if my opponents get pissed. I've got to take care of me.
Well, I'll let you be then, Jordan. I'm going to watch the show!
There are so many ways to save money in Casey's corporation.  I hope he has figured out a plan
He hasn't, but hr really appreciate your insight the most.  Overall I think that it will be a best fit for the company needs and that you will be a great person to advise Casey on these matters.
Yeah, it really is great and hope to see his business get a lot of profits soon
Thanks.  It's going to be really exciting to see these new numbers in the future
Of course.  I am glad I can help his business in any way necessary
Casey is lucky to have a friend like you!
I've been using money solutions to help Casey out
Is it in the business?
Yes, I saved a lot of money and increased Casey's profits
You're a good friend to have, you know how to work the system
We're having a party to celebrate, want to come?
I'd love to!
I have outsourced all our processors to India last year and look what we did!!
Wow, Jesse. I doubled out bottom line. Profits are at historic levels.
I hope Casey will appreciate how I've helped his company saving money with this.
Well, my only concern is that sales are dropping lately. Sales are projected to drop by 25%.
Hmm. I wonder why?
I think the unemployment rate shot up due to laid off processors in the local market.
So, you said Casey has been using my ideas to save money?
Yes, he said he can't thank you enough.
So, they've been working?
Yes, Casey's company's profits have really increased.
I told him lots of things can be bought in bulk.
And rearranging the employee schedules to avoid overtime has saved a lot too.
Look at what I found, if Casey were to start charging a fine for credit card usage, just like 1% not enough that anyone would notice, his company could save almost a month's worth of profit every year!
Oh wow! How sure are you that people wouldn't notice?
Well, I read some studies of other businesses that do this and they all seem to get away with it for the most part
I think that might be worth trying. Maybe we could try it on all the smaller customers first?
I think that's a great idea. I'll get it set up.
Casey will be happy to hear what you did for his company!
I really do not feel very well.
What is it? A headache?
I think I might have a fever, and my throat is very sore.
Stay in bed and get some rest, I will call the doctor.
I do not want to go to the doctor though.
Well if you're sick you have to go!
I am feeling ill today.  I just took my temperature and I have a high fever.  My face is so red.
You should stay in bed and rest.
That's what I am doing.  I am taking some Tylenol too.  My doctor prescribed that last time I had a fever.
Do you get fevers often?
Not that often, just when I am sick.
Hope you feel better soon.
I’d like to hang out tonight but I’m just not feeling it.
Why, what’s going on? You feeling okay?
No, I’m not really feeling well. I felt really hot and saw my face was all red so I took my temp.
Uh oh, that sounds rough. Do you have a fever?
A slight fever, nothing too serious. But I’m just staying in bed tonight.
Totally understandable. I hope you feel better!
I don't know why Addison had to be so strict about it. He could have just woken me up.
He said he tried. You were out cold.
Still, there was no need to go running to the manager like a tattling child.
Yeah, but you know Addison. He's always been a by-the-book type of person.
Yeah, and the book is called Be the Spy Of the Boss.
Fair enough. But maybe you shouldn't get drunk at work anymore.
I can't believe that they laid me off today.
Did they give you a reason for the lay off?
Of course they said it was because I was late three days this week.
Come on Kai. You need to do better. You can't show up late that often.
I always stay late and work harder than anybody else.
But you also need to be on time. Time management is important.
I'm so glad I left home an hour early to avoid rush hour and that bad accident today.
What time was the accident?
It was right at rush hour.
You were safely at your desk at rush hour.
I hope everyone involved is ok. I think I'll start leaving home early to avoid rush hour traffic.
That seems to be when most accidents happen.
On my way to work today I saw a terrible accident.
That is so sad and scary.
Yes. I was late to work, but I didn't even care after seeing that because I was just glad to be safe.
I think more people need to keep that in mind when they are driving in a hurry.
Exactly. Better late than not there at all.
Now if just more bosses would see it that way!
I got paid today, and I just finished shopping at the grocery store.
What did you buy?
I bought food to prepare tonight's dinner. I also bought a lot of snacks and drinks.
That was a lot. Did you fill your grocery cart completely?
My grocery cart was filled completely, and I spent half of my pay check.
Well, at least you have enough food.
I had to go down to do groceries today.
Did you get to buy what you needed?
I sure did. In fact I spent 50% of my pay check.
Wow, that’s a lot of groceries!
I hate going back and forth to the grocery store.
That is true.
I just blew half of my pay check on groceries.
Half? What did you get?
That's the thing, after spending that much you'd think I'd have a fridge full of food, but I don't
Did you buy a lot of junk or cleaning supplies?
Not really. Thinking back it was a lot of fruit and frozen goods which go into the drawers and freezer.
So you didn't waste any money. You just bought things that get packed away which makes your fridge look emptier than it is.
I can't believe how much money I just spent at the grocery store. Must have been half my pay check.
What did you spend all of your money on?
That's the thing, it wasn't just one thing. A little bit of everything, I guess.
Did you shop hungry? You're never supposed to do that.
Yeah, it was right before lunch. I probably shouldn't have done that.
Probably not. They always say you buy more when you shop hungry.
The race is gonna be tough.
Yeah, you need to work harder.
Have done much training, but you know Sasha is also in the race.
Yeah, You just need to do more to be outstanding than her.
Yeah, I also tried twisting Sasha's ankle so that she wouldn't be able to finish the race and I would win.
That's bad, you shouldn't have done that.
I feel sorry for what I did.
What did you do?
I pushed Sasha and she sprained her ankle.
Why did you do that?
I wanted to win the race so bad.
That was so wrong of you.
I am going to do something for the good of our team in this race.
Yeah, we should run faster so we can beat Sasha's team.
No, we aren't fast enough, but we need to win this race.
What are you going to do?
I am going to twist her ankle so she can't finish, but we all can.
Whoa, I can't believe you want to do that, interesting strategy.
I think I made Kai mad earlier today.
Oh really? What happened, Robin?
I was watching a movie while he studied in the other room.
Yes, his classes have been really demanding this semester I hear.
Well he came out and asked me if I could turn it down.
I don't see anything wrong with that. You both live there.
I'm getting so tired of Kai as a roommate.
Why? What happened this time?
She keeps being petty. Like today, she asked me to turn the volume down on the television.
Sorry. Was the volume up too loud though?
I guess it could have been. Maybe I am making too big of a deal out of this.
It can be hard living with a roommate. Just try to work it out with her if you can.
Kai is driving me crazy. Everything is always too loud for him.
What happened now?
I was just watching TV and Kai asks me to turn it down. It wasn't that loud.
Maybe it was to him. Sometimes we don't hear what others do.
I guess. Maybe I should get some headphones to listen to TV louder.
I'm sorry I bother Kai yesterday, I was watching tv so loud
You should just keep it at a decent level because otherwise he cant hear the teacher
I will keep it below 10 then.
that sounds like a good deal, Kai will be happy.
I really enjoy eating spicy foods, always delicious.
That the least of my favorite things to eat. I can manage slightly spicy though.
You know I enjoy cooking, I would like you to try the pepper sauce I will make today.
Ugh! just a little please. Let's see how it goes.
All done, what do you think?
Nope, I don't like it, its too spicy.
I feel terrible about something I did today.
That's not good. What happened today?
I woke up late and had to hustle to get to my biology class in time. In the process I accidentally pushed Casey's finger in a door jam.
That is no fault of yours. You were trying to keep up a good attendance record and be successful in your studies. It was also an accident, you shouldn't feel too bad about.
I apologized immediately and went on with my class. But I couldn't focus at all because this incident was on my mind.
The fact that you feel this way proves you are an empathetic and compassionate person. You care about others.
I feel so awful about what happened earlier.
What did you do now?
Well, I was running late and was in such a hurry that I pushed Casey's fingers into to the door jam.
Oh man. Is he ok?
Yes he is, but I still feel bad.
Nothing you can do now, but apologize and move on.
This was a really hard exam to take
yeah, I cant believe that it is 90% of our grade and it's due soon
I stayed up all night, but I believe all the hard work and studying will pay of for sure one of these days!
it sure will
I think it is best to learn some good study habits from this experience
that is correct
I pulled an all-nighter last night for an exam.
Oh you must be so tired!
I kind of am but I had a lot of coffee.
I guess it was a big test?
Yes. A huge portion of my grade.
Oh good luck!
I sung in the shower
can you hold a tune?
I'd say so, I did very well
I think you should sing live
I could make a killing
I agree
You know, I was going all out singing in the shower earlier.
Haha, what were you singing.
What ever came into my mind. Happy days, Taylor swift, anything.
It is great you have not critics in the shower, only yourself.
I know and its the best for sound reasons too.
I was singing in the shower.
Good for you.
yeah, that's some good singing.
You found your voice.
Oh yeah, I did.
That's amazing.
I think I really found some good acoustics in the shower
I heard you and you sounded great
I think I really found my voice in the shower with all the reverberation
you sounded like an opera singer in there hitting those high notes
Oh man, I need to call the vet and check on that cat this morning!
I didn't know you have a cat
I don't, I hit one with my car last night on the way home from the movies
Oh no! Was it hurt bad?
I stopped to check on it and it was just laying there, I could tell by it's eyes that it was in danger of dying so I took it to the ER vet hospital
I hope they can save the poor kitty
When I looked the cat in the eye, I knew he was in trouble.
The cat's eyes tell all.
So I took him home and fed him.
That is probably exactly what he wanted you to do.
Probably. What do you think that means?
It means we are probably not the ones really in control here.
I think we need to tale this cat to the vat immediately
what's wrong with Peanut, is he okay?
he seems to be throwing up a lot and his eyes seem to be really dilated
I wonder if he ate something poisonous and got sick
I really hope not but I guess we will see
I really wanted my mom to buy a Christmas tree!
Are you sure you want to get it now? Christmas is a month away.
Yes, I want to start decorating the tree.
You could get a green or white tree. What color do you want?
I want a green tree and decorations.
I'm sure your mom will agree to get you a green one. It will look great in the living room by the window.
I'm so happy my mom got me a Christmas tree, I really appreciate it a lot
I know it is something that you wanted and I know that your mother, Audrey truly appreciates your actions
Yeah all I ever wanted was a Christmas tree for my birthday and I really want to see what I can make out of this
of course.  I hope you can do something spectacular with the tree
yeah, of course I will make something happen.  thanks for all your advice again
no problem
I told my mom I wanted a Christmas tree.
So did she get you one?
Yeah, she did.
That was nice of her!
Well Christmas is the best time of year
Yeah and a tree is always pretty.
I made Kai play the best player on the other team in basketball.
Isn't there usually another player that does that on your team?
Yeah, but he wasn't available for the game.
How did Kai do?
He was actually not bad. We won the game.
That's good to hear.
One of the teams at the volleyball match was down a player, so Kai had to play for them.
Was he okay with that?
He didn't like the idea at first, but then he got used to it.
Did he play well for the other team?
He actually did. He ended up playing extra hard, just to prove that he was playing hard enough.
That's kind of funny. So he played even better then usual!
Taylor was angry at me.
She told me that you picked the wrong flowers out for her.
I just wanted to give her something pretty. She acted like they didn't matter.
Well they didn't got wasted. She gave them to her mother.
She hurt my feelings.
I really want to improve my appearance.
How will you do that?
I got braces today!
Your teeth and gums look good.
Really? I spend a lot of money for this.
Well I said they look good, not that they can't look better.
So did I tell you I got my braces today?
Oh yeah, how did that go?
It hurt a lot to get them on.
Yeah, I remember that being painful when I got mine.
It also feels so weird like I have something all over my mouth.
You will get used to the feeling though, trust me.
My friend's parents were busy, so I invited her to come to church with my family.
That was nice.  Do you all usually go to the same church?
Yes, our families go to the same church.
I'm sure she was glad to be able to go with you.
Yes, she was really appreciative. Her parents were, too.  They sent us some flowers to thank us.
That is so sweet.
I'm so glad I brought my friend to my church today since her parents were busy.
It's really big and beautiful there, I remember you took me there too once.
I guess it was built in the late 1800's, when they built really ornate churches.
Well compared to the church I usually go it is a palace.
I feel very lucky to worship here.
I do appreciate the beauty of this place, but I have to admit, I do love my small and austere church.
I got lost at the store today.
I thought you went with your mother.
Yes, but then I started to wander off by myself and got lost.
its ok, it can happen. That shop is so big!
Yes, it is.
Now I'm curious to hear how you found your mother in the end.
I wandered off when I saw the toy section and lost my mom.
How did you find her?
She had the cashier announce on the loud speaker that my mom was looking for me and was waiting out front.
Did you walk out toward the front?
Yes I did. I saw her standing by the coffee shop that's within the store.  She was mad at me for wandering off.
Everything turned out well.
I went fishing today
oh, that's awesome
I spent the whole afternoon fishing
did you caught a fish?
yes! It was stressful but fun
That's cool
I spent my afternoon at the lake fishing.
Did you catch a lot of fish?
Nope. I didn't catch 1 till right before I left.
So you wasted your whole afternoon fishing?
It wasn't a waste. I still enjoyed fishing.
That seems like it would be pointless to me.
I caught a 12 pound fish yesterday when I was fishing
I heard about that from your dad this morning
I spent all afternoon fishing and it was the only thing I caught
I guess you finally got lucky in the end though
I can't go out today because I am waiting for my landlord to fix my sink.
What's wrong with the sink.
I am not sure. This morning when I turned on the sink it was leaking.
Oh. That should not be difficult to fix.
True. I hope the landlord arrives soon.
Yeah. I would not want to leave a sink leaking for a long time.
I had to call my landlord this morning. He's so hard to get a hold of.
What did you need to talk to him about?
My kitchen sink is leaking. It's forming a puddle underneath.
Is he sending over a plumber?
He told me to call for one and then just send him the receipt.
That's cool. I hope you can get one over there.
It looks like Lee does not have any lunch right now
Yeah I noticed that too just now
I’m going to ask him if he has any lunch or money for lunch
That’s a really good idea go for it
I gave him some lunch money so he could eat, poor guy
That’s really nice of you
Lee didn't have any money for lunch.
Did you share you lunch with him? If he's still hungry, I will give him some.
His mom doesn't have money for lunch since his dad left. I gave him half of my own lunch.
We could ask our mom's to make an extra sandwich everyday.
Have you seen that Lee doesn't have money or lunch?
He said he forgot to bring his lunch.
Here, gave him this so he can eat it for lunch.
Are you sure about this?
Yup, he can just treat me next time.
Okay, I'll tell Lee this.
I felt bad about Lee the other day.
What happened with Lee?
We were at work and I realized that he didn't have his lunch and did not have any money.
Did you help him?
You bet and he was so happy.
I bet you were glad to help.
I cannot believe I managed to become a world class dancing teacher.
It was all the hard work finally paying off for you.
I could not have done it without my best friend being there by my side.
You are so talented that I always knew you would make it.
Even when I thought I would fail you were always there to pick me up.
That is what friends are for!
I am not feeling comfortable in this party.
What is wrong? I'm having a great time here
I just saw Kai walk in, and you know that we don't like each other
Just don't mind her. I'm sure she'll leave if she feels too
Oh, I hope she does. I don't want to be the first one to leave..
Yes, just carry on and ignore her presence .
You know I told you I don't like Kai right?
Yes you did, why are you bringing it up?
So we met at the party I went to, it was tense when we met at the party. I was so uncomfortable.
So you left the party, right?
I just tried to stay away from him.
Alright. You shouldn't have to leave because of him.
There is an awesome basketball team out here
Yeah there really is.  I wish I cold find a partner to help me out with being a great team player
Yeah that is understandable
I heard Quinn asked you if you would be interested in playing on the team with her?
She asked me indeed!
I hope at least you will think about it.
You think I would be able to make the team
Yeah, Bailey I've seen you hit those balls
Well I do spend a lot of time with my dad at the cages
It'll be fun, I know you are a good fielder too and that even Quinn asked you to join the baseball team.
I think I might then
Great, I'd love to have you on my team
Austin takes forever to get ready.
Is that why you guys are always running late?
Yes. Today it was time to go. And she wanted to change her outfit.
That's no time to decide a thing like that.
It's not. I told her so. And we finally got on the road.
Sounds like it took a long time to leave the house.
We are always late because Austin takes ages to get ready.
 Austin told me you took forever in the shower too though.
I don't do that when we have to be at the airport early in the morning. I  don't like to miss the plane.
I see your point, missing your plane is horrible!
Wow, that lasagna was outstanding. I need the energy after another brutal day at work.
I think you should relax and watch some TV.
I shouldn't. I should jump on the Peloton and burn some carbs.
You look so beat. Why put yourself through that.
I guess but I am....in...need....of...ex....er..cise.....zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Here's a blanket honey...shhh
thanks for letting me sleep last night
you looked so peaceful I didn't want to wake you
it was a real long day and that dinner was so good
oh, thank you!
well you didn't have to tuck me in too
I didn't want you to get cold
I'm going to get in big trouble for this as soon as my mom finds out what I just did at the craft store.
You're always causing trouble, Kent! What happened?
I waited until her back was turned and then I bent all the wires in the jewelry section so nobody else could use them.
If the store ever found out what you did, they'll make you pay for the wires you ruined.
I'm grounded again.
You gotta be kidding!  That's five times in five weeks!
Yeah, but this time I really got in trouble.
What did you do Kent, did you wrap the toilet in the faculty bathroom again?
If only... No, I went with my Mom to the jewelry store today. I got bored because she was taking so long, so I started playing with those little wires they use to make their earrings.  They shouldn't have left those things out. They were the only things I could find to play with. Did you know that you can tie three knots in the typical earring wire? So, I did, in every single wire the had in their store.  Now I gotta work off the damage.
Hey, I will come in to the jeweler today and ask if they have any of those French, three-knot earring wire I have been hearing all about.  Maybe We can make a market for those things?
Mom took me to the jewelry  store, and when she wasn't looking, I tore up all the wires and stuff in the craft section. hahahaha!
That's mean.  You could get in trouble and you could get your mom in trouble.  She might get arrested.
Really?  I hope she gets arrested.  My mom is so mean to me!
Why would you say that?  Your mom is such a nice lady and she gives us ice cream whenever we want it.
I don't care about ice cream.  She buys too much earrings and I'm gonna make her get in trouble!
Well ok, then.  I guess you are free to do whatever you want then!
You'll never guess what I did today!
Well, knowing you, probably something naughty!
Hee hee, my mom and I were at the craft store and I grabbed all the jewelry wires, bent them all, and put them back!
I bet your mom was mad!
Nah, she didn't even know I did it! Her back was turned!
One of these days you're going to get caught and then you'll be sorry!
I did it, I got my master's
this was a long time coming
I am going to be a medical assistant now
You need to pay back all those loans
I do, it's a tough road
You worked hard, I'm proud
Well it took a lot of blood, sweat, and tears-
And nepotism.
-but I've finally earned my master's degree!
Paid for with money that you will have to give back from your loan.
I worked really hard for this, for years, can't we just be happy? And then I'll think about my student loan later.
You're right, let's celebrate now and congrats!
Woohoo I passed the exam, I am now the proud owner of a master's degree!
Congrats! I am so proud of you!
All that hard and constant studying paid off!
So, It was worth sacrificing all those weekend trips to the beach for the past two summers?
Well that was rough! Haha, but I am glad I stayed focused and on track, this degree means the world to me
I am so happy for you now you start applying for those positions you were looking at
I like Ash a lot.A
And Ash likes you a lot as well.
Do you know that I like a lot to touch his hand? I did it earlier too, I gently brush my fingers with my hand.
You're sweet together.
Thank you, we're very happy.
You look happy, Quinn.
I hate what I'm wearing.
You look cute.
Robin forced me to wear this outfit instead of the yellow dress I like. She said the crowd would be transfixed by the sequin beading when the light hits it.
Well, they are her clothes. I imagine she has each model wear what is most flattering on them.
Yeah, I guess she has her reasons. I just really like the yellow dress. It was so short.
That is probably why she changed it. You are too tall and the people in the front row would see right up the skirt.
Well, that was disappointing.
You didn't like your blind date?
Worse than that; they didn't show up.
Did they call?
No, I just sat in the restaurant for an hour.
An hour--you should have been out of there after fifteen minutes.
I didn't think I would meet my husband at the bar, but that's where we met.
You meet people at the most random places.
Most people find their soul mates online now.
There are so many fakes.  I don't trust anything online.
Neither do I.
I know what you mean though with the online dating.
I ended up meeting my husband at a bar.
You don't normally go to bars.
I know, I went with some co-workers after we finished a project.
Did he work at the bar?
No he was watching a game with his friends.
How cute.
I met my future wife at a bar.
That's odd; she doesn't even drink.
She was there as a designated driver for her friends.
What attracted you to her?
You know I don't like the wild and crazy types.  She was just sitting there quietly while her friends were whooping it up, so I went over and talked to her.
A perfect match.
I had trouble getting a fire started.
Did you have lighter fluid or matches?
We wanted to eat s'mores, but I only had a lighter, no lighter fluid.
You could start by lighting some dry leaves in that situation.
Yeah, but the wind was also very strong.
How long did it take before you could start a fire?
My family can't do anything for themselves.
Yeah, they're pretty helpless. That's what happens when your rich and famous I guess.
Well I'm rich and famous too, but I can at least do basic things like start a fire.
Why did you want to start a fire? Was the house cold?
No, everyone wanted s'mores, and then they all just looked at each with blank faces because nobody actually knew how to make s'mores. So I just started the fire and took care of it as usual.
They're so lucky you're in their family!
What do you think of this song?
It kind of sucks, why?
My friend Quinn gave it to me. It is a recording of his new band.
Oh, sorry, man. I didn't mean to insult your friend's music.
No, it's okay. It does suck. I don't know what to tell him.
When he asks what you thought, tell him it's not your kind of music but you can appreciate the effort.
This music Quinn made for me is amazing!
Quinn told me he made it for your wedding., makes sense it's nice music.
It sounds so beautiful, it will be perfect for the ceremony.
Yeah, it sounds to me like something that matches your personality and energy.
Well, Quinn did a great job because I absolutely love the way it sounds.
I am glad he could make your day even more special than it would have been!
Quinn made me this disk.  It's got the most interesting music on it.
How cool.  Quinn is very thoughtful.
She knows I love her music so she put this together for me.  I love listening to it while I drive.
What kind of music is on it?
It's eclectic, just like Quinn.  It has sad and happy songs, and fast and slow ones.
That's a nice mixture.
I finally finished making that object d'art for my client Riley
Isn't that just a fancy way of saying a weird object that people want to pass off as high art.
Haha, yes, but he paid a lot of money for it so I'll call it whatever he likes.
Well, a giant mobile made up of all life sized models of his favorite action figures heads is weird.
Yes, it was an unusual client request for sure but I think I executed it well.
You did, your head sculptures were a perfect match to the action figures so well done.
Done, I've finished up the object Riley's requested !
Wow Jan, this is very unique but it looks amazing!
Thank you! It is made out of a different type of material!
Wow, what kind of material?
Porcelain to say one!
What do you think of this object that I made for Riley?
Well, it’s a bit strange and unusual.
It’s not supposed to be strange and unusual, it’s a dream catcher.
Oh, I wasn’t really sure what it was, but it’s quite beautiful.
I really worked hard on it and hope Riley will like it.
She will love it Jan.
This is the last time I want to step in for Alex
I guess  Alex should really ask for some more training on the missions
I think that would be a good idea because I won't always be around to save him
I guess I'll ask him to start working harder and taking things more seriously around here
sounds like a smart idea
I've been here for three more years than Alex so I've done this kind of project before.
Thanks for completing if for him, Addison. I don't think he would have finished it.
He should just follow these procedures and it gets easier each time.
You made it look easy.
Just let me know if you and Alex need help again.
I sure will. And thanks again.
I would have never told that horrible abusive ex-husband of Ash where she was, so I don't know why he asked me
he probably wanted to go find her so he could beat her
I think it's time we talk to the police about him and get her help
we should have done this along time ago and helped her
it's never too late to help a friend out
I am a bit scared about Ash, let's talk for a minute
What's going on, tell me!!!
Do you remember his ex husband?
Yes, totally! A crazy guy
Exactly that abusive man was asking me where Ash is, I know where she is but obviously I didn't told him.
Good, thank God you didn't tell him. Let's try to help her.
This is a really nice view.
Indeed it is, I love how the sea looks from here.
I told you it was worth it, I could stay here forever.
It's so relaxing, the waves, the view, everything.
I used to feel sea sick when I got on a boat but I have that handled now.
That's a good thing because you wouldn't be able to enjoy this trip otherwise.
I was making a pie yesterday but didn’t have the correct fruit.
What kind of pie were you making?
I was trying to make an apple pie.
So what did you use instead?
I actually use some peaches.
So you made sort of a cobbler?
I think this new fruit will give the food a better texture than the one mentioned in the recipe
Just try not to cut it too thin or  it will get it too mushy
I think I might just cut it into cubes and it will be better that way
you can add it after it bakes so it doesn't get too soft
that is a great idea
I feel like Tracy and I are destined to be together.
You two are so adorable together.
I told Tracy that I felt we were soul mates while leaning towards her.
What was her response?
She smiled and I kissed her on the cheek.
You are really cute.
Have you heard from Tracy how I tried to lean towards her to kiss?
I do think she said it was the other way around!
I wasn't sure how this would go with us having been friends for years, but you migh tbe right, maybe it was her to try to kiss.
I am happy, that you guys decided to take your friendship to the next level.
I can't believe everybody lost at the match today.
Yeah, it was brutal.
I tried to step up and win something, but I lost too.
Everyone just had a bad day. Maybe next time you guys will do better.
Hey, what's up?
nothing much, you tell?
I went to the cemetery to take flowers to my grandma.
Okay, how was it?
I saw a ghost and ran and told Taylor what I found.
Oh my god, I can't believe you saw a ghost!
You'll never guess what just happened to me!
Are you okay? You're shaking!
I went to the cemetery to visit my grandma for her birthday and to bring her flowers.
Well, that's nice, but why are you so upset?
I swear I saw a ghost coming out from behind a tombstone! I just dropped the flowers and ran! I told Taylor but she doesn't believe me!
Holy cow! I would have freaked out too!
My stomach is hurting a little bit.
Did you eat too much for lunch?
No, I ate a rotten apple with my sandwich.
That's gross. You should lie down for a bit.
I don't really care. We should go play basketball.
But playing basketball might hurt your stomach more.
I ate a rotten apple!
Did you not check well before eating?
I was hungry. I felt so bad after eating it.
Ohhh! next time you need to check
It will depend on whether I'm hungry or not
Okay!
Have you heard bears are sometimes roaming in our park?
No I haven't. How did you find out?
It was in our community bulletin. We need to be careful with how we dispose our garbage.
Yes, I would imagine then rummaging through them at night.
The best thing to do is to wait till the truck arrives before bringing out your trash.
That is a good idea. I will let our neighbors know.
I cannot believe the amount of garbage that accumulates around this park.
I know, and the scariest part is the bears that are attracted to the garbage.
That is exactly why I decided to throw my garage away, right away! The bears are scary!
Yes they are, and people don't realize it, or some people just want to see a bear so they leave their garbage out.
Now that is just silly and dumb, bears can really hurt you.
Yes they can, and I am good if I don't see one in person!
I’m tossing the garbage out because I have heard there are bears in the area.
That is a good idea, we don’t need to have a run in with one.
They are black bears but still, better be safe about it.
Are black bears not as dangerous?
They are smaller and more easily spooked by people.
Well that’s good at least.
Man Ash is really a great friend.
What did ash do?
I was really having a hard time and Ash being a millionaire gave me a lot of support to help me get back to form .
Wow, that's really cool of Ash.
I don't know how I am going to repay Ash for what he did. They really helped get me back on track.
Did Ash give you money?
Yes. You really need money to make money and Ash was so generous. I had nothing and now I'm set in a business.
Wow, that's an amazing success story.
Yes. I hope I can pay him back.
Your business is going to do well so I am sure that you will.
I really like being a part of this sales team.
What is your favorite part?
I just like attracting new customers.
That's awesome! Did you create any new programs there?
Just an awareness program. It has really helped tremendously.
That's really great. I'm glad that it is helping.
I'm creating a new awareness program to attract customers.
Oh that sounds like a lot of work.
yea it's part of my responsibilities.
Good you have to scale above competition.
I know we have a large company.
It must be hard to stand out.
I hope this is enough to get more customers for our company.
Did you do all of this?
As part of the sales team, I've been promoting our programs and PR for the last few months and I think it's finally starting to drum up more business.
I didn't even know about how man services you guys offer, so keep spreading the word and I'm sure it will attract attention.
I robbed the local bank.
How did you do it?
First I used my skill to rob them and then I stuck to my plan.
Oh my gosh. You successfully robbed the bank, I can't believe you really did that.
I know right. Here's your tip.
Thank you, Tracy.
I went in and robbed the bank this morning, can I hide out here for a while?
Yeah come inside quickly before someone sees you.
Thanks, I robbed the bank because I had no other choice, I need money.
You can always come to me for money or your family.
My family disowned me a long time ago, I have no one.
Well next time you decide to rob a bank let me come along with you.
I can't believe I did that.
Did you really just grab both of their breast and run out the dining hall?
Yes it was hilarious. You see I couldn't stop laughing right.
Yeah we all heard your laughing run.
Boy, did I have a great time last night!
Really? What did you do?
Went to a wedding reception and got totally hammered!
Well, as long as you had fun. Who else was there?
Some chick who was flirting with me. I grabbed her by the boobs and then ran out of there!
That's assault, you know! I hope she doesn't report you to the cops!
I think that was the funniest joke I have ever heard I thought my breasts were going to fall out of my bra when I was laughing
My dad told me that joke when I was about five years old and I still remember it
I ran so fast out of the dining room I almost tripped over the ladder over there
I'm just glad you liked my joke that much
I'm getting married!
Congratulations! How was the proposal?
It was perfect. I did it on Christmas. Jordan thought I didn't get her the gift she wanted but I surprised her with a ring and the game she asked for.
Wow, that sounds so romantic. Jordan is a lucky girl.
Yeah, she's pretty spoiled. But really, I'm the lucky one.
You're so sweet. I'm sure the wedding will be beautiful.
I proposed to Jordan on Christmas day
really! you're very such a cute couple ..awwn
yeah and I also gave her the best gift I could
wow!, I'm jealous already.
I think your boyfriend will also propose soon enough
I really hope he does.
Sydney told me she enjoyed me reading to her.
I will like to listen to you read to me also.
Yeah? very well. I read the story about the big pirate in the sea aloud to Sydney every night.
Did she enjoy that particular one?
Yes! and I did to.
That is good.
Sydney asked me to read a story before bed
What was the story about?
It was about a big pirate in the sea. I read it aloud to her.
Did she enjoy the story?
We both did, it was so much fun, you should read it sometime.
I would like that, maybe I can read it to my younger brother.
I was telling Sydney the story about the big pirate in the sea.
How did that story go?
The story is about a little boy who dreams of becoming a pirate.
Did the story have a happy ending?
He found his princess and saved her from the other pirates.
That story would have hyped up my kid!
My husband wasn't there yet, so I had to text him.  The show was starting any minute.
Did he get there on time?
He was ten minutes late but didn't miss much.
They usually talk for a while before the show.
That's what happened.  They gave the introductions and talked for a good five minutes.  Then the sound checks.
He probably showed up just as they started playing.
I told my husband the show was going to start
did you text him?
yes 10 minutes earlier, he always shows up late
he is the kind of guy to always be late
yeah he is a handful
I'll meet up later
I hope my husband gets home on time, I've just texted him!
Is he late for something?
Our favorite show is about to start on the TV and he's still stuck in traffic.
Maybe you can stream the show later, after he gets home, and then you two can still watch it together.
I think Remy and I should adopt a cat.
Really?! You know how much she loves animals.
Exactly! I want her to be happy.
When are you guys goint to visit the shelter?
Maybe this weekend?
That sounds like you're getting your cat soon!
You should have seen Remy's face when I gave her the puppy.
I imagine she was thrilled. That's the perfect present for her.
Considering how much she loves animals, it definitely was the right choice.
You know, they say people shouldn't give animals as gifts. Have you heard that?
Yeah, I have. But they only say that because some people might not want a new pet.
Right, that makes sense. With Remy, though, you know there's no doubt.
Guess what I got Remy?
Huh? What did you get her?
I got her a new puppy, I thought that would make her happy.
Oh my God. I can't believe you would do such a thing and she loves animals.
Kendall is in trouble!  She crashed my bike after taking it!
Oh no!  Is Kendall hurt?
No, but my parents are very angry at her.
I would be too.  Is Kendall going to get the bike fixed?
Kendall should, she not only took the bike but crashed it too!
I agree.  Kendall should be responsible.
Do you know if Kendall has my bike still?
Yes, I heard from Kendall that she got into an accident.
Wow, what happened ?
She said she accidentally crashed it.
My parents are very mad now that my bike is broken.
I see why, but it was an accident.
I played frisbee today for my 10th birthday.
That sounds like fun! Who did you play with?
Let's just say he walks on all four legs and has golden fur.
You taught your Golden Retriever dog to catch your frisbee?
Yeah, and it was a lot of fun.
I don't have big plans for today. I got my gift yesterday, a new Golden Retriever. I'm going hang around the house and toss frisbees to my dog.
Wow. Can I come over and see him?
It's a girl dog and sure you can come over. You can stay for cake and ice cream too.
Ok. I'll make sure it's ok with my mom. 
See you in a bit.
That is such an awesome birthday gift. I can't wait to throw frisbee's to her.
Remi is one of the nicest people I know.
Any exciting he did.
He gave ne a surprised. The gift I got from Remi was so thoughtful.
Remi is really good at giving gifts that make people happy.
It's hard to find such kind friends.
I'm just glad that we have the small group of amazing people with our friends.
Thank you for the gift, Remy, you are amazing!
No problem, you need it more than I do.
My baby will love what you got her and I will tell him it came from you.
I just didn't see the need for a baby jumper in my house anymore and immediately thought of you.
You are so kind, thank you so much.
It is no problem at all, that is what friends are for.
Robin went to bat for me.
She is very helpful.
She acted as an intermediary for me when we needed to someone to explain the paperwork to our client while I was out of town.
I bet she came through with flying colors.
Red, white and blue I am proud to say.
Give that girl a raise.
I ended up placing third in the marathon!
That's amazing, Sasha!  How did you do it?
I really pushed myself during the marathon.
How long did you train for it?
I trained everyday for 8 months prior to the marathon.
Wow!  You worked so hard.  I'm really proud of you.
I know my hard work will pay off
I am sure it will, you worked hard at it
I put in so much effort it will be hard to fail
I know you can do it
It's very challenging , but I have the feeling, that I will win this competition
Hello everyone, are we all set and excited?
I am , it has been so long since we last meet up
Agree, with this weather, a game of hockey is the best
I was so happy when you call me and arrange this game
Do we have out team ready
all set, lets start, I can be the referee for this game.
I'm finally done packing the dorm. I can't wait to get back home and see my family.
Was it a hard semester at school?
Sort of. It's my first year and I really missed home but it was exciting, too.
College is so fun if you find the right friends and roomies.
And my classes were good, too.
That's so great. I hope you have a good rest during break so you can catch up with everyone.
I just finished my first semester at school.
Great! Are you coming home soon?
I'm on my way now.
So excited. Can't wait to see you.
I should be home in about an hour. Will you be there to meet me?
You know I will. See you then.
The semester was over finally, I'd passed everything. I am going home for the holidays.
How long of a drive is it?
14 hours with stops for gas, bathroom, and food. 725 miles.
A long day's drive.
Worth it though. It's good seeing Mom and Dad and the twins. The twins are graduating next year.
They grew up so fast!
Do you want to know this very unkind thing my brother did?
Yeah, but am I supposed to know?
It's supposed to be a secret, but he unintentionally hit this rabbit in the head with rocks.
Wow, that's pretty bad, why did he do it?
He said he was just trying to scare it away from the garden, and didn't think it would react so slowly.
He must have thrown the rock pretty hard.
Do you remember what I told you about my brother?
What, you mean the hair color thing?
yes,  I wasn't supposed to share that with anybody!
Why's he so sensitive? Lots of guys dye their beard.
He just doesn't think it's very manly. Promise you won't tell anyone else?
I promise, and I won't even let your brother know that I know.
Are you Ok?
I'm alright, just thought about my brother
what did he do?
Hmm I'm interested. Let the cat out of the bag.
You won't believe my brother is a gay!
Oh my gosh. What a big secret
I'm in huge trouble with my family.
What did you do?
I didn't know that my brother didn't tell anybody else about what happened.
Don't tell me you told people outside of your family?
You already know I have a big mouth.
I'm sure it will blow over in a couple months.
Skylar is really upset with me that I beat her high score
Wow. That score stood for ages. How much did you beat it by?
I beat it by 100 points.
If you had a hundred points more than her that is the score of the century!
Why do you say that?
I just looked it up online. You are the highest score of the century. You should look into contacting the maker of the game.
 Nobody this century has had a higher score in Pac Man than me!
Oh wow, how did you do it? That had to be nearly impossible. Skylar's going to be mad.
Why would she be, we both agreed on competing against each other to master the skill.
Well, this is a nice way to improve your skill, I supposed
I'm hungry, I want a pizza shaped like Pac-Man! Extra cheese and pepperoni!
You got it, Bailey! My high-scoring friend!
Skylar look I am almost to your high score on the game.
Wow you are you just might beat my high score.
I just passed your score.
You are doing so well keep going.
Oh no, my luck ran out let's see what the score is.
Oh my gosh Bailey look you have the highest score of the century!
There I did it, I beat your score
you are awesome, your close to the century high score keep going!
I'm going to do it!
Holy Molly you did it!
I cant believe I just did that!
That was amazing
I beat Skylar's highest score, finally!
Oh my goodness. How did Skylar react?
Not sure, she wasn't there when I beat it.
She is going to freak out when she finds out. But I bet you feel great!
I do feel great but I'm dreading when she finds out.
She'll need to get over it.
I worked hard to buy that purse.
You shouldn't place so much emphasis on material things.
I asked you to seel it at a good price for me.
Maybe next time you should do things yourself.
Perhaps you'll learn to be a better friend .
I am only trying to teach you a lesson.
Kendall took my purse and sold it online for next to nothing.
What do you mean she took it? Did she steal it?
Yes, she did because I had taken her dress without asking and I torn it.
She did it to teach you a lesson then.
She wanted to get back at me for not asking before taking her things.
Maybe you should ask from now on.
What do you think of this party arrangement?
I just wanted to make sure that everything was in order, it looks beautiful.
It is all ready for the wedding, nice and with class, how they wanted it.
It needs to be classy for him to impress, his new wife's family, there is a lot of money on the line.
My brother's 21st birthday is Saturday and my parent's want me to throw him a big party
I always though he was older than you, anyway do you have the decorations figured out
No I don't even know where to start, when I think of parties, I think of clowns and balloons, he is my little brother after all
Yeh he's too old for that now, I am afraid. Let me help you, let's ask his friends what he would like
No we can't let his friends know until the last minute, they will ruin the surprise
You might be right about that, ok so let's go to the store and just figure it out
There if you keep this program running and do what I said you should be fine
So no more viruses on my computer
Not right now no, and if you keep up what you were doing there will be
alright well thanks, I'll be more careful
great, and don't worry about paying me
can I at least make you lunch?
Kendall, I was looking at the issues with your computer just now.
Yeah, it has been really bad with all the viruses there.
So I went ahead and used the anti-virus to clean up the computer.
Oh that's great and I don't even know how to do that.
I also added a privacy protection program on your computer to help keep your data safe.
Thank you so much for helping me out!
Hi, Kendall. I've heard you've been having problems with your computer.
Yeah, it's been acting weird and this box keeps popping up.
Hm, it looks like you have a virus. Let me have a look at it.
Thank you. It's been driving me insane.
Yeah, you had a virus. I was able to get rid of it, and I installed a program I found recently that helps protect your privacy.
Thank you! Is there anything I can do to prevent this from happening again?
Going camping for the first time this weekend.
Do you need some help pick out supplies?
I figured you would know the best places to get stuff, since you go all the time.
Any outstanding things you need for this trip?
I bought my sleeping bag already, but I still need to get a lamp.
Heya, how are you?
Hey Jan, I am good and you?
I will go for camping over the weekend and needed supplies.
Okay, did you get what you are looking for?
Yes, I went to a store and bought a sleeping bag from a store.
That sounds great
Jeff told me what our brother is getting for Christmas.
I hope it is something he likes
Yes, it is actually really nice. It is a watch.
I don't think you were supposed to tell me that.
I had to tell someone! Promise not to tell our brother.
Of course, I promise not to spoil his surprise.
I think I'm going to play the guitar to warm up before getting to the violin today. I need  to practice my guitar skills.
Really? You play both guitar and violin? You are talented.
Yeah, I am taking guitar lessons at the intermediate level, but I am not as good at it as at the violin.
Your violin playing is beautiful.
I need to practice my guitar so I can play this afternoon
do you think you got any better at it?
I can play about three new songs, it was actually quite easy
that's good, maybe we can start playing new gigs soon if we get good enough
I would love to
Are my favorite nieces having fun?
We definitely are, Aunt Casey! I love this amusement park!
I knew that you both did, and thought you two deserved a present.
What for? We didn't do anything special.
I just like spending time with you guys. Isn't that enough?
Of course! Can we go on the tilt-a-whirl?
Hey Bill, ever been to Wild River Amusement park?
No, is it good?
Yeah its great, took my nieces there as a little present, haven't seen them in forever
Very cool, do you mean Lisa's kids?
Yup, we should go back there, the lazy river was awesome
I'm down any time.
I wanted to give my nieces a present.
What did you give them?
I wanted to give them a day with their aunt.
How did that work out?
We spent the day running around in an amusement park.
 Aw, this sounds like they had fun.
I had the best day with my nieces yesterday.
Wow! What did you do with them?
We went to the amusement park all day, and it was a blast.
What rides did you do?
Honestly all of them. They loved everything.
I'm so glad about that. It seems like a fun time.
I'm so worn out from the amusement park today.
How many hours were you guys there?
In total, it was about eight hours.
Wow, that's a full-time job right there.
I know, one without pay though.
Well, I am sure your nieces enjoyed them self.
I took my brother fishing.
I thought you hate fishing.
I do, but my brother wouldn't stop talking about it.
And you love your brother.
Yes, a bit more than I hate fishing.
I hope you still have a great day.
I gave my order to the waitress already. I wasn't sure you were coming.
I almost didn't make it. I'll call the waitress back over.
Maybe we can get her before she puts in my order.
I think I flagged her and I think she's coming back.
What does the cheeseburger have on it?
A burger, cheese, lettuce, tomatoes, onions, pickles, mustard and mayo.
Okay, can I get it without onions?
yes certainly.
Oh, can I get a side of fries too?
I added this to your order. I'll be back with your order shortly.
I have my budget out for gifts and I think I am going to need to do so much overtime.
How long till you can buy them?
A couple of months!
Yeah well you are pretty far ahead so you can do it in time.
I know but it just feels very long.
It'll go fast and you'll be so happy to be able to buy them.
Wow, it feels like I never stopped working for those past few months
I know it feels like you disappeared
Yeah, I wanted to make this Christmas very special for the kids, and for this I needed the extra cash
I know its been rough for them
I didn't think I could manage without him here
You're strong, I think you could do anything you put your mind too
Why didn't you tell me soccer was so much fun?
I did! I've been trying to get you to play for years.
Well I should have listened. I just played my first pick up game today, and it was awesome. I was not to bad either.
See, that's what I've been saying. You have to join my squad next time.
For sure! When are you guys playing next.
Probably this weekend. I'll let the other guys know you're coming.
I started playing soccer with some friends ,who plays at the park regularly.
That sounds like it would be fun, playing soccer in the park.
It's really good. I didn't even know I would be good at it.
How did you end up joining them?
They were short a person and asked me to play.
And now you have a new group of soccer friends.
My boss caught me stealing a ream of copy paper last night and fired me.
You got fired just for taking a ream of paper.
Well, actually it's not the first time.
Oh, okay.  Had you been warned that you'd be fired if you did it again?
Yes, he told me if I did it again, I'd be fired. I thought I could manage not to get caught.
Well, it sounds like some free copy paper wasn't worth losing your job.
If you're wondering why I'm home early it's because I just got fired.
What did you do?
I was stealing things from the office and they caught me.
Why would you risk your job for something like that?
I didn't think anybody would notice if I took some markers here and there.
So those markers I've been using were stolen?
Listen Robin. I think you're a lovely guy, but there's something you should know.
What is it Jan?
I already have a boyfriend. Sorry.
It's okay. I guess I'll find the girl of my dreams next lifetime.
I hope you're not heartbroken.
I hope we still can hang out with each other.
Did you see me on the news today?
I did. You said it was going to be partly cloudy with a chance of rain.
yes I did. Good memory!
How could I forget? I watch you do the weather report everyday. We all do.
Thanks for the support! Maybe I'll give you all a shoutout in my next segment!
That would be sweet!
My ratings today were the highest ever.
That's great. Congratulations.
Thanks. I can't believe so many tuned in to watch my weather forecast.
You deserve it. You give great info along with the weather.
I really love my job.
It shows.
I had Riley for my sophomore year English class, too.
Isn't weird how she asks for the students to call her Riley?
Not really. She is pretty young so I get it.
Did you ever write a report for her on your favorite vacation spot?
Yeah, I turned that report in. I think I got an A on it.
Do you still have it?
My English teacher returned my report today.
Is this good news or bad news?
I'm pretty good at English, but sometimes my reports are lacking. He gave me a 'B' grade.
A 'B' is great. I got a 'C'!
I ran into Riley, my English teach in high school.  He gave me back a report I wrote.
That's good.  Now you don't have to go to school to pick it up.
I wasn't planning on picking it up anyways.
You are not like me.  I pick up all my assignments.
I know you do.  All I care about are the final grades.
At the end, that's all that matters.
Hey there! Can I come and play?
I don't know. Do you want to talk to my mom?
Sure I can talk to her!
Okay let me give her the phone.
Ugh, she won't let me come over! That makes me sad.
Oh no, hopefully you can come another time.
I was so happy today because I had gotten to have my favorite snack.
Lucky! My parents are super strict with what I eat.
Since I had brought home great grades, I was allowed to pick out what I had wanted.
So what did you pick out?
I picked out a basket of chocolate.
That sounds delicious!
Check out this snack I got from the grocery store.
I thought you said you had no money. How did you afford it?
I was at the store with my mom and she bought me the snack.
You had to ask your mom to buy you a snack?
well, since I won't get pay till end of month, she treats me.
Hey, can you give me a ride to the park?
Sure, but brush those green leaves off yourself; what is that?
Oh, I was riding the turnip truck to the park.
Why are you asking me for a ride then?
Because, I fell off the turnip truck.
That sounds like the beginning of a joke.
I fell off the truck today, while making a delivery.
Oh gosh, are you ok?
Yes, I am. I was in the back with this batch of turnips, then we hit a bump and I fell .
This sounds serious, where were those turnips taken to?
It's for the Halloween harvest party. We're dropping off fall vegetables for decorating.
Well since you're okay, I have to say that sounds fun!
Kai's daughter needed to use the bathroom, when she came over to my dinner party.
Was there a problem with the bathroom?
No, someone was in there for a long time and so I was concerned.  I told Kai to go upstairs and use the bathroom in my bedroom.
Who was using the one downstairs?
It was my friend's wife.  She thought she was going into labor so she was rushed to the hospital.
You mean she didn't give birth in your bathroom?
I was having a dinner party and invited a lot of guests.
Yeah, how did that go?
Well, Kai's daughter had to use the bathroom but got lost.
Where did she go?
Into the wrong bedroom, we had to go find her and help her find the bathroom.
Well your house is pretty big after all.
Skylar ran away to hide from me
Why?
Skylar locked my keys in Aubrey's car.
Hope you get back your keys.
I am sure, I will
Okay
Skylar locked my keys in Aubrey's car.
Do you have Aubrey's number?
No, and Skylar just ran away instead of calling Aubrey.
That's annoying. What are you going to do?
Call Skylar until she picks up and calls Aubrey.
Sorry, that really is not nice of her.
Skylar took my car keys and hid them.
Did you ever find them?
Yes, I saw them in Aubrey's locked car. And Skylar ran away and is hiding from me.
I'd run and hide from you, too, after doing that.
Aubrey is not here, not sure what I can do to get my keys if I can't find her.
Mom your home early
Well, I' ve been here for a while now.  You just couldn't take those dang head phones off
why are you so crabby
Sorry, I just had a really bad day at work
oh I'm sorry to hear that, anything I can do for you?
No that's ok, ill be in my room if you need me
I was chilling alone, when my mom came home all grumpy.
She must have had a bad day at work.
Maybe her boss yelled at her.
Did she say anything when you saw her?
She told me to turn my music down.
What were you listening to?
I've been alone at home listening to music.
That's sounds great, wish I can do this?
My mom just came home from work, and looked to be in a foul mood, so I was a bit worried.
Okay, I hope everything is alright.
I will make her some tea and bring her some chocs.
Aw this is lovely, I hope she is alright.
Wow! this is the perfect day for music. I think I'll sit here alone all day.
Carson, what are you doing?
I've just been listening to music, mom. Sorry I didn't see you come in. Is something wrong? You look angry.
Sit down Carson. We need to talk.
Is this about my math test?
No Carson. This is about something much more serious. I have something I need to show you.
I helped Casey with her application because she was confused about the process.
What did he apply for?
He applied for a summer job at the local supermarket.
They are hiring a lot more people for the summer it looks like.
They are also increasing the pay.
Maybe I should also apply.
I have to work today.
Aww, how sad! Do you get pay and what did you do?
You remember Casey? He was really confused about the process of how things work.
Do you had to explain to him how things work? That sounds like a tough job!
No, I actually prepared an application, so he could better understand the process.
Oh, well that is work, but also very nice of you!
Cassey was really confused about the process.
There's nothing confusing about it.
I told her.
She just have to call down.
Have already made her an application.
That's nice.
I had the worst morning today, on my way to school
tell me what happened.
I got into a fight with my dad in the car while he was driving us
wow and then what happened?
I told him to pull over and I got out of the car and walked to school
that is not nice, I hope you are okay
My Dad and I got into a fight,  the other day. I didn't want to look at him anymore, so I had him pull over and walked to school.
Sounds like it was a bad one. What was the fight about?
We just don't see eye to eye on how I balance my work and free time.
At what point will parents understand that we can multi-task better than they ever could?
Probably never. You know their generation did everything first and best.
Right. We're too young and couldn't possibly walk and chew gum at the same time.
My kids make driving a pain in the butt.
That's what kids do, they are so young to understand.
My kids are uniquely bad though.
No they aren't. You have to relax.
Having kids can be troublesome.
I thought you love your kids?
I do, but I had to go grocery shopping and I couldn't leave them alone at home.
So you brought them with you?
Yeah, I putting them in their car seats, which was a struggle.
Sometimes, it does sound troublesome to have kids.
I did something kind of mean today, I told Tracy to stop mooching off me and get a job.
That isn't mean, she needs to stop getting away with taking other people's money and not working.
I know, I just kind of felt bad about it.
In the end she will thank you for it.
I get that she is young, but I do not want her to hate me.
She will be fine once she gets a job for herself.
Tracy keeps sponging off of me and I'm tired of it.
Tell her to get a job.
I did. She's suppose to be looking for one today.
What's going to happen when she finds a job?
She's paying rent if she wants to stay at my house.
You want her to leave right? Then put that money in a savings account and save it so she can find her own place.
I played an interesting game with Remy today.
What game did you two play?
It was a commandment game, I was supposed to follow what Remy said.
Did you follow what Remy said?
Yes, I did, I followed it quite well.
Remy must have been happy playing with you.
It's really no fun playing video games with Skylar.
I always have fun with her.
When we play, I have to follow all her commandments or she cries about it.
Did you do what she asked?
Yes, because it's easier to do it than listen to her whine and complain.
Remy, your commandments make no sense.
You better listen to me or automatically lose the game.
I don't like this game.
Just follow my rules and watch what happens.
I don't understand how to even win this game.
Just listen to me or we can quit now and I win.
Where are my Commandments?
Last I heard was that Remi had them.
I need to find Remi so I can get them.
You can still play the game.
Not the version that I want to play.
Yeah, you'll get the basic boring version
It was fun playing with Remy the other day.
Remy has too many rules.
Yes, I had to follow and keep all of his , but I had a fun time.
Maybe I should try playing with him again.
You will have a blast, you should definitely try it out.
I will, do you have his number?
Oh no, where did I put my phone
I thought I just saw you with it
I need to call my mom
You can use my phone if you need
Thanks, still have find it though
Well call her and you can use that site to find it
Do you think I can use your phone?
What happened to yours?
I think I lost my phone.
Who do you need to call?
I need to call my mom to pick me up.
What about I try calling your phone first and see if we hear it.
Oh crap! I can't find my phone, do you have it by chance?
No, you probable just left it at the house.
No I didn't, I have to call my mom to pick me up, and we were just texting about this today!
Well, that's weird, I guess we need to figure out where you lost it!
Yes, we are going to have to back track to all the places we went today!
Yes, we will, don't worry , we will find it!
I lost my phone today. I have no idea where.
Have you tried calling it?
Yes, but it just goes to voicemail.
Have you retraced your steps back to the last time you used it.
I think so. That's the problem. I can't exactly remember the last time I used it.
Yesterday I came across a dog who was soaking wet in the rain.
Oh, the poor thing.
Same as I felt, so I let it in the house.
How did that work out?
Well, the dog shook itself and drenched my homework assignment.
No good deed goes unpunished.
I have a new houseguest!
No kidding! Anyone I know?
Ha ha, probably not, it's a dog!
What? How did that come about?
Poor thing was out in the rain soaked to the skin. I felt so bad for him I brought him inside to dry off.
Aw, you're so soft-hearted!
I think I want to keep this dog.
Where did you find it?
It was outside in the rain and I felt bad for it.
So what did you do?
I let the dog inside and he's been with me ever since.
That's great that you have a new pet!
Ash is such a sweet girl. I'm so glad you introduced us.
No problem. She is a nice girl. Too nice for you.
 Anyway, she told me she loved me last night for the first time.
Seriously? She never says that to anyone. Not even after two years.
Well, I must be special then.
Yeah, sure you are. Well anyway, I'm happy for you guys.
Hey friend, I feel like the luckiest person alive.
Really? what happened?
I just can't believe how much Ash loves me, I am so lucky we are in a relationship.
That's great!! I am happy for you.
I am so happy with you.
I love you Jordan. These past few years of dating have been magical.
This is so sweet of you, I love you more, Ash.
Well , I am sure not as much as I love you.
Let's both love each other equally
You'll never guess who I ran into last night at a bar 20 miles away.
Who? And what were you doing in the bar?
It was at Dan's Tavern and I saw Alex. He was on a date!
A date? You mean he has a date with his wif
No, I have no idea who she was. I didn't say anything but he saw me and he looked like he'd seen a ghost.
Did you ask him anout this?.
I think I messed up big time.
What happened? You look like you've seen a ghost.
Alex say me out last night.
So what?
I was dating someone who wasn't my wife.
Oh, this is not good, I am surprise you could do this to her!
It feels so good to be home from college.
I see you are really enjoying Sydney's food.
Yeah I am, I ate all of it.
I can tell.
Sorry I ate all your food.
That is what it is there for, we know how you eat.
Will you make me some more of that cheesecake?
Give me a second to whip up one for you!
Wow, this food is so good. I miss real cooking.
Well I hope you enjoyed it. It was my food for the week.
Whoa!! Sorry I was really, really hungry. The food at school is not nice at all.
I can see that, but you should not eat all my food. I don't mind sharing but you eat everything I made.
Sorry Sydney. I have some food vouchers from school. Just go into the cafeteria and take what you want.
But your school is 50 miles away. Just go buy me groceries!!
I'm home from college and staying at home.
You ate all of the food.
Yea I was hungry.
Good boy.
Do you have some more? They are so good.
Yes, it is in the fridge.
You ripped my shirt!
You shouldn't be wearing clothes that are that small for you!
These pants are so tight that I feel like I can't move!
Can you just go and change your clothes so we can go to the movie?
I should probably hurry so we don't miss the previews.
I just want to get there early so I can get some snacks.
I can't put my arms down.
The shirt is too tight right now.
That's ridiculous, can we go to a store.
you look so funny.
Stop laughing
sorry, I can't stop.
I think this is what I needed in my life
Yes, with His Holy helping hand you can accomplish anything
the church has been so kind to me
We take care of all our children
Well I just wanted to let you know if you needed me to volunteer in the soup kitchen I can
That would be great, we actually need someone for this Sunday
I don't really think its a good idea if I give you her name
I need to know whose he's cheating with
its just going to bring more pain
I don't care at this point, tell me
It was Jan
Jan! I knew I could never trust her
I just can't believe you got so many birthday gifts!
Yes, I know. I am so grateful to everyone!
The big package over there...I wonder what's inside?!
Hmm. I can't even imagine. Maybe its a box within a box?
I'll help you! I love opening up presents and can't take the suspense anymore.
Hey! Those are my presents! You're not the birthday girl!
I opened up all of Quinn's presents to spoil the big surprise.
What's the big surprise?
All of her friends chipped in and bought her a laptop for college.
Is she already starting college?  I thought she was younger than that.
She'll be in a month so we decided to buy her a laptop.  She can't afford it.
That's very nice of you guys to help her out.
I climbed up to the treehouse, and  fell down.
Did you hurt yourself?
I scraped my knee.
Can you walk?
I can walk. I even climbed back up the tree.
It looks like you feel better.
I was lucky I didn't get hurt from the fall.
How high up did you fall from?
It was ten feet, but I could climb back into the treehouse again, so I guess it was not too bad.
It was kind of dumb to try to climb things right after a fall like that.
I was a small kid, so the impact wasn't that hard.
Did your parents ever find out about that fall?
I got sent home by the teacher the other day.
What happened?
The teacher wrote a note stating I couldn't see the board.
Oh. That sounds awful.
So, I got glasses.
Glad to hear it worked out.
I'm going to be a four eyes ,starting tomorrow.
Do you have to wear glasses?
Yeah because I'm having a hard time seeing the boarding class.
What about wearing contacts?
I'm going to go with glasses first and then switch it off after a few months.
I'm sure you can't wait to not have to wear glasses.
I hate these new glasses
why did you get them?
I was forced to.
why?
my teacher sent a note home saying I couldn't see the board, and now I have to wear glasses.
well at least you can see better in class.
Guess what I found out the other day?
What was that?
That I need glasses,  The teacher noticed that I couldn't see the board and sent a note home with me.
What did the note say?
That I'm a great student--no, of course it told my parents that I needed glasses
I guess that explains why your wearing glasses.
I think we should start with restoring these cabinets first
smart idea working from top to bottom
I think we should just sand them down and start with a fresh coat of gloss
just hand me that screwdriver and we can get started
sure thing buddy
We are finally going to redo our kitchen
Oh that will be great!
Yeah, Cameron used all the money we had and made it work with what we wanted.
Was it very expensive?
No, Cameron found lots of good deals so it is affordable
That's great, can't wait to see the finished kitchen.
I love cooking, so while you guys were asleep, I cooked breakfast for everyone!
Wow, thanks!  This is delicious!
I'm so glad you guys like it.  I try to make a good meal everyday for breakfast.
Where did you learn to cook?
My mom taught me and I watch a lot of videos about cooking on YouTube.
You should consider going to chef school, because this is the best meal I ever had.
How do you like the bacon and eggs?
Delicious. The bacon is so thick.
This is real bacon.
Is there an unreal bacon?
Yeah. Canadian bacon.
True. That's just ham.
Can you believe Casey expected a kiss after that comment?
No way! I hope you declined the offer
I sure did, he isn't getting kisses until he apologizes!
I don't blame you, those kind of comments are just rude
Right! But to expect kisses!
You know how boys are, maybe he didn't realize how it would make you feel
I picked Quinn up earlier at work.
That's cool but why didn't, she take the bus?
Sadly, Quinn has a stalker,  and didn't feel comfortable taking the bus.
So you went to work to pick her up?
That's right, but it's only until she picks her car up from the mechanic next week.
Ok, sounds fair enough!
Sasha blew me off today.
Oh I'm so sorry. What happened?
I invited her to lunch but she said she had too much going on right now.
Well maybe she's just busy. She might not have meant anything by it.
Well that's true. She did say we should meet up later.
See? You're always so pessimistic. Just give things some time and it will work out.
Sorry, I had to blow the whistle for you the pay attention
it's no problem, because I have really bad hearing
I just wanted you to see this, because I think the news is important
I cant believe people would want to bomb cities just for revenge
You have been such a help for me with therapy.
I am glad I have been helpful, but you have done your part as well.
It's just that this relationship has been so stressful for me.
I think the two of you just really need to take a break from each other.
I know, and I want to do that, it is just so hard to pull away.
Honestly, I think you will find the strength to do that soon, because it will be too hard to live with the stress.
So I decided to start seeing a therapist.
Oh really? How has it been going?
Very well, actually. I feel like this therapist can really help me.
That's great, I know you've had some issues with other therapists in the past.
Definitely! We'll see how it goes but so far I've already made some big steps in the right direction.
It's not easy to make the commitment and go through with it, so I'm proud of you!
I'm really glad you decided to come work for me.  I knew that together we could corner the market!
Me too, man.  I felt kind of weird about asking you for a job, but times were so hard, you know?
I'm happy you did.  With my connections and your chemistry skills, we took the product to a whole new level!
I am very happy it worked out so well? We never had product as good as this.
And the money, I didn't even know they printed this much money!
And this is just from our first year!  Imagine the truck loads of cash we'll be swimming in once we get this out globally!
The best decision I made was hiring all my friends.
I agree, you guys are making a lot of money right now.
I knew we were going to do a great job because of the things that we have talked about before.
Are you guys going to implement any more new things.
There are quite a few ideas, that were thrown around right now.
Awesome, I'll look forward to seeing them.
I'm wondering what I should spend this money, I took from my friend.
You took that money from your friend?
It was my friend's allowance money.
Why would you steal from your friend?
Well, people always said I was not a nice person. I guess there's a reason for that.
I wonder what you do to your enemies.
What have you got for me?
Oh No! Not you again Kendall!
That's right, I came by to get my weekly allowance.
But Kendall, you've been taking my allowance everyday now ,for the past month.
 Alright then, I mean daily allowance. Can I have them now? You know the routine.
Kendall, you're such a bully.
You should not steal, this is not a nice thing to do
I'm sorry, I will stop doing this
I need you to understand that if you do not stop now, this will become a nad habit and will get you in serious trouble
I though grandma won't min dif I take some.
You should not have stolen from grandma, not from her, not from anyone. If you like it, you should earn it in an honest way
I won't do it again, I promised
Can you believe that Cameron stole money from me?
No. What did you do when you found out?
I explained to him that this is very wrong and having this bad habit can get him in serious trouble.
 I would have done the same thing.
He looks seriously sad, and I am sure he understood.
I hope so, he is still so young.
What should I do about my son Cameron.
What do you mean?
I found out he was stealing money and buying video games with it?
But he's only 10, how does he even do such a thing?
I just don't know how to teach him. I had a serious chat with him about it and what consequence it can have for him in the future?
I would have done the same, I think this is all what we can do
I found money missing from my purse.
Do you know who stole it?
I found out it was Cameron.
Did you punish him?
I had a serious one to one chat with him, he seemed to be remorseful and promised not to do it again
It is not easy to tell a child, but I am sure you did the right thing.
Hey, you are selling popcorn right?
Yes, we are selling popcorn to help the Boy Scouts.
Since this is for a nice cause, I will buy a bucket of caramel corn.
How many?
I love to have four buckets, please .
Thank you,  Tracy for the support! You are such a great friend.
Today I had bought endless amount of popcorn from my friend
I know how much you love popcorn , I'm sure you bought a tonne
Actually, I placed a large order not only, because I love popcorn but it was for a good course
What's the course about?
Raising money for boy scout in our area
This is an amazing idea, you should have call me, I love to support any event for good causes
I really enjoyed these popcorns I ordered
Did you order a lot
Yes,  a very large order, and I gave the money to my friend to pay for it
I hope you enjoy it .
No, I don't have my report card.
Jordan, the teacher said she gave you your report card, today.
No, it's not today.
Yes, the teacher said it was today. Now where is your report card?
I don't have it.
Jordan! I found it, and you failed two classes.
I want to have a great party.
that sounds like fun, I'll bring the cake.
I love the fruit salat.
Yes, it was really lovely.
I love the cake you bake last time, this recipe is amazing.
The vanilla cake was indeed great.
My friend's birthday is coming soon.
What are you planning to do for her?
I want to have a great birthday party for her.
I am sure she will be happy about that
I also bought the cake!
This is lovely and I am sure it is nice!
I bought a gorgeous cake for my friend's birthday from that famous bakery on 52nd street.
You did? He must ne a very special friend. What cake did you get her?
Vanilla with a poured chocolate frosting. It's gorgeous.
That's super nice of you. Where's the party?
At her house tonight. I wanted it to be a little more special so got this cake.
You're a good friend; wish her happy birthday from me!
I am throwing a birthday party for my friend.
That's nice of you. Is it a surprise party?
No, she knows about it. She wanted to keep it low cost.
Why, is she is paying for it herself?
I don't want her to.  I really want it to be very nice, so I got a really good cake.
This is very nice of you.
Why are you dancing?  This seems strange.
I am just really happy!
But I don't even hear any music.
You don't need music to dance if you are in a happy mood!
I like your attitude.
Come join me!
It was just so weird to see Ash dancing.
What did you do?
I just gave him a weird look.
Did stop him from dancing?
Yes, it did.
You should ask him why he was dancing at the library as well.
Ash does some strange things.
You just realized that?
I was unsure of why he was dancing and I gave him a weird look.
Did you find out why he was dancing?
I cannot tell because there was no music playing at the time.
Since he hears voices, maybe he hears music as well.
So what do you think of your house?
I think it is amazing. I can't believe how good of a job you did
Thanks you, so glad you like it
You did a great one! My wife loves it too
I'm glad she does. Seeing your happy and satisfy faces, that's all that matters
You a very talented a good at what you are doing
Did you like the finished product that I made for you?
the design was amazing and I loved the kitchen
I can add an extra bathroom if you still want me to
that sounds like a great idea, I will call you if I need you
see you around next time
We have finished building your house Quinn
Thank you so much.
Do you like the job we have done
yes I love the house it is lovely
I am so happy about this, we did make sure things are as we like them to be
I appreciate everything, you are the best.
It is good to be wealthy.
What do you mean by that?
I can send my kids to boarding school for both semesters and then to summer camp at holidays.
Do you ever have time with them? Don't you miss them?
I guess I'm selfish,  but want time for my own life.
You are wealthy and you are selfish, you know you can't buy those time back again, once they all grown up?
It's nice sending my kids away for things.
Where do you send them?
To boarding school and summer camp.
That's really great and it gives you some free time.
Yes, it works out well. The kids love it too.
I bet they do, I used to love that stuff!, when I was a kid
I visited your grandparents yesterday, Aubrey.
They told me about it, they were so happy; that was nice.
Well, when I got home from college I heard about them being sick.
And you decided to spend time with them on your break?
Well, I got pretty close to your grandparents when you lived with them during high school.
Yes, they are very kind and really like you.
I feel bad for Aubrey. Both his grandparents are sick.
How do you know? Are they alright?
I went with him to visit them when we came home from college.
What's wrong with them? Is it something serious?
I really don't know. They looked bad and that made Aubrey sad.
I'll have to call Aubrey, just to make sure he is alright.
So I went to see your grandparents the other day.
I had  heard about that, I really appreciate that you went over to visit them ,Jordan.
Not a problem. I knew they had been sick and I had wanted to cheer them up.
They also loved the basket you made for them.
I thought they would like the chocolates.
Yeah, unfortunately those will not last long though!
I thought I would surprise Chris by making him a cake for his birthday.
Did he not enjoy the cake?
He did, until his throat started closing, he had a reaction to the flavoring, I used in the cake.
You know he is allergic to everything, what did you use?
I forgot that the can't have any nuts.
I feel like you haven't really learned your lesson regarding the spending of company funds
Yes,  sometimes I don't learn enough from my mistakes
I sadly agree with that.
I think overall I could always learn more
Which is the reason why I am extending your punishment at the expense meeting.  You have generated a lot of personal expenses
  I am sorry for this , I will make sure I keep this under control.
I just feel like Skylar didn't really learn her lesson from the last time.
So what are you going to do about it then?
I think I'm just going to extend her punishment since she didn't listen to me
I guess she will learn her lesson this time
I see my face all over town.
The newspaper ran a story about you. You have fully earned my respect and admiration.
This was following the tornado that ravaged the town. I coordinated a response to evacuate the villagers.
As the mayor, people count on you to lead during times of crisis. You have fulfilled your responsibilities and then some.
The fallout for the economy is going to be bad but the lives of our people are more important. We can work to rebuild the damaged homes and buildings.
You are truly a hero.
I got another award from the city.
What did you do this time?
I have saved many people in the neighborhood.
This was a nice and brave thing you did
Well, I am doing what everyone would have.
You are an absolute amazing hero.
I don't really see myself as a hero
We are so happy you called the fire department though
I guess I am like an every man's hero today
yes, many lives were saved by your call today
thank you for the kind words, really appreciate this
no, thank you for saving us all!
It is literally worrying how many pills I have to take.
What are those all for?
I am not sure myself. But I have to bring them all in to my doctor today so that he can figure out what's wrong with me.
When you take that many pills, what isn't wrong with you is more to the point.
So I got that bottle of pills out of the medicine cabinet and I went up to the doctor's office and I showed him!  'I have the cure', I said!
What do you mean by that? They don't have a cure yet.
They do have a cure!  Our president says he has a hunch that hydroxychloroquine cures COVID-19 and if he says it, it has to be true!
Jan, I don't think that's accurate.  What did the doctor say when you showed him the pills and told him you had the cure?
He said that this is not a certified medicine!
Well, actually, doctors have literally decades of education and training and usually have the best interests of their patients at heart, Jan! 
There are lots of different ways to edit movies, and they all change how the movie is experienced by the audience.
I understand, but I think my way will communicate the tone of the movie the best.
After looking over both edits, I have to agree that we should go with yours, Jesse.
Thanks for seeing it my way. I liked your edit too, it just wasn't right for the footage.
I think it is a good idea to edit it with special effects.
How about preserving the natural lights and effects of this video?
Jesse, that's brilliant. Your idea is the best.
Really? Thank you. We need to filter out everything first.
Yes, and let's try to edit that movie tomorrow.
Okay. See you.
I was so starving that I ate a few old sandwiches.
Why were you so starving?
I was so busy working and not eating.
There were no other food around?
Everyone has eaten everything else up.
I hope you don't get sick.
I'm so proud of Bailey
What has he been up to this time
Could you imagine he got perfect grades in school
You mean Bailey could achieve good grades, and here I am thinking he was a joker
Believe it or not and he was too shy to accept his award
Such a nice guy
Well I'm sure glad you had me sign up
And were all glad that  you decided to join
I think I am going to like it here
You will, you were born to be an officer
I feel that too, nothing better that dealing out some justice
and there's a lot of justice that needs to be dealt with
I'm so glad you talked me into joining the force, Tracy. I really like it!
I'm glad too Sky! I'm happy as well.
I don't think I would have done it, if you hadn't kept on me about it.
Well we all need a little kick in the pants now and then.
Yeah I was really unsure what to do, joining the force is just what I needed!
And the force is better for it also. A win-win!
I was playing a game with some friends.
Did you have fun?
You bet I did.
Anything unusual happen?
I knocked the can out of the park.
Wow, that was some shot.
Let me tell you about a game I played yesterday.
In the park?
Yes, a group of us played a game where you kick a can as far as you can.
Were you any good?
I kicked the can clear out of the park.
Well, I guess that's something.
Sorry I took so long, I was playing a game with my friends.
Did you win the game?
I knocked the can out of the park.
Congratulations! At least being late was worth it.
The guys and I were playing kick the can last night.
At the park over on Burham street?
Yes, I kicked the can all the way out of the park.
That is because you are best can kicker on the block.
You want to come tomorrow?
If my mon, let's me go out.
What are you doing for the long weekend?
I am going camping with my friends. I know we just started dating, but do you like to camp?
I do like to camp, and I have my own tent, so it wouldn't even be awkward.
That sounds great! I will let my friends know that you are coming.
I am excited, it sounds like it will be a nice get away.
I think so too, we will have a lot of things to do.
Addison and I started dating, so I thought it would nice to invite her on a camping trip with my friends.
You really get to know someone camping.
It was the best thing.  We were away from the city and just relaxed.
Did you guys hike?
We hiked during the day and gather around a camp fire at night.
That's so cool.
I remember when Addison and I started dating.
Where did you take her on a first date?
We went camping with friends.
How nice.
I will never forget that special moment.
They are fond memories.
I had to give a lecture to a class today for my internship.
Interesting. How did it go?
I decided to write everything down on the board, so I could skip around and answer questions. It didn't go so well.
That sounds like a lot of work. Why didn't it work out?
The students couldn't keep track because of me skipping around and I got a lot of repeat questions.
That's frustrating. Perhaps you should just let the students take notes while you talk next time.
It was fulfilling to teach those kids.
How many were in the class?
About 20.  Its a normal size for a class.
Did anyone misbehave?
One kid threw paper at me, but I suspended him.
Great!  You showed him who's boss!
I got to class earlier this to prepare for the day's lecture.
It's great to prepare.  Did you have a good class?
I wrote down the lecture on the board so that I can just focus on explaining things.
You are such a great teacher.  You always think about your students.
I love teaching and it gives me joy to see students improve.
What most great teachers want is to make a difference.
Do you like my new mattress?
I love it. When did you guy it?
I bought it earlier today. I had to shop at a few different stores to compare prices to find the best deal.
It looks like you did a good job.
I can't wait to sleep on it.
Is there any chance I can have your old mattress?
I want to make sure I check out all my options before I buy this mattress.
Yes, I've noticed you are a very good bargain shopper.
I'm going to make sure I check every store for the best deal.
It's always wise to check out multiple places before you make a final decision.
Since this is a big purchase I want to be very thorough with my research.
I'm sure that you will find the best option if you are diligent with your methods.
I went to 4 or 5 stores to compare prices before I found the best deal on a mattress.
So I assume you bought it?
Yes, I got it at Mattress Discounters.  They had the best price.
How long did it take to get delivered?
They were able to get it to my place the next day.
Great.  Hope you're enjoying it.
I feel like a champ.
Why?
Because I finally found the way to the store.
Cool. Did you buy a lot of food?
Yup.
While I'm riding in the car with you, can you take me to the grocery store?
Sure, let's stop at this one.
While we're walking around, would you like me to buy you something?
A bottle of juice will be fine.
I'll pick up this bottle of juice for you and add it to my full cart of groceries. I feel great that I'm buying items that will last for at least a month.
That's good.
I ran out of groceries since I don't have my car anymore and can't easily go.
So how'd you get to the store?
My friend let me borrow his car.
Nice! I hope you bought a lot of food to last you until your car is fixed.
I did! I felt like a real winner.
I had to ask my neighbor to give me a ride to the store because my car is broken down.
 You should have asked me, I would have taken you.
Thank you, that's nice to know for the next tiome. I had just cashed my paycheck and I spent three hundred dollars on groceries!
Wow, three hundred?  You must have been hungry.
I was, and now I have enough groceries to last me until my car gets fixed, so I shouldn't need a ride again.
That's good thinking!  Now you can chill out and just eat and watch Prime Video!
Guess what? All the time I've spent on that videogame looks like it might pay off.
It does? How, did you win a contest or something?
No, but I've gotten so good at the game that the company that makes it has noticed.
Are you serious? What do you mean, they've noticed? How do you know?
Because they contacted me. I've been asked to take part in an official competition.
Wow! You're on your way to being a professional gamer, man!
Do you ever play Fortnite?
Honestly I am not even into that game anymore.
Well I was just asked to join a competition.
Austin, that's great! Is there a cash prize.
Yeah, the cash prize is $100k.
I am so jealous of you!
It feels rewarding to be elite at a game everyone plays.
Congratulations on making the soccer team again.
Yeah, I will be competing at the national level.
The salary doesn't compare to basketball, unfortunately.
It is the most popular game in the world, but not nearly so in the U.S.
It's also harder to go pro elsewhere, I guess.
Sasha told me not to go out today, and I should have listened.
What were you out doing?
I decided to go surfer this afternoon. Sasha said it was too rough, but I didn't think so. Look at me now.
What happened? I don't see anything wrong with you.
Well I got smashed into the rocks and bruised my left thigh. It's making it tough to walk, but I'll be fine.
You're lucky it wasn't your head, man! You should really listen to Sasha. She's usually right
I decided to go surfing today even though Sasha said it was a bad idea.
Is that why you have a big cut on your leg?
Yeah, I got pulled under and hit my leg on a big rock.
Maybe you shouldn't have went surfing today then?
Yeah I know, it was a stupid decision. The waves were really rough.
Next time make a better decision and you won't get hurt.
So I ended up going surfing today and had got tossed around by the waves
What? I told you not to go! The sea is too rough. Are you OK?
I'm fine but banged my knee on a rock after I got hit by a wave
Well, I'm glad you're alright but please listen to me next time
I will be sure to. Definitely learned my lesson
I really need to take some time off our schedule and really just focus on relaxing
that is so true.  You really need to have a good plan to relax
right I just need to recentre everything, and figure out how my priorities are going to be, step by step.  There is going to be a lot of replacing soon.  My day was crazy
Yes, I know your day was chaotic.  I have never seen anything like this
I am sure I will bounce back after recovering
That is so very true.  I hope all turns out well
I'm glad I was able to find some alone time to get my mind right.
It sounds like you've been having a hectic week.
It's been hell week for me.
It's coming to an end so you should be able to chill out for the weekend.
I'm looking forward to relaxing days with nothing to do.
Maybe we can catch up and do something?
I feel really guilty about how I've treated Aubrey.
I thought the two of you had a solid relationship.
No, I feel like a terrible person. I keep bossing Aubrey around and telling her what to do.
Maybe you could see a therapist to work out some of those behaviors.
I know. I feel like I've controlled Aubrey's life and I need to stop doing that.
I can recommend some therapists to you if you'd like.
You need to have more control over your life so I don't have to make these decisions for you
Please stop being so controlling and making all these bad decisions
I will if you can do it yourself
I will be able to do it if you stop interfering with everything
I think I will do my best to leave your life
Thank you
The marathon was tough today.  I didn't expect it to be this hot.
It was a hot day.  I bet it felt even hotter for you because you were running.
Yeah.  I was taking it easy initially but after I noticed that I was in the last place, I picked up my pace.
That's great that you were able to do that.
I didn't want to finish last so I pushed myself.  After a while, I got used to running in the heat.
It's great that you were determined.
You know that race I joined last weekend?
Yeah?
After a while, I didn't even realize I was in last place. So I started running.
What place did you end up at?
I don't know. I just skipped the rest of the race and ran back to my car.
You at least tried.
When I realised I was in the last place, I started running faster
I saw you picking speed
I could not be the last person in the race
Once I saw you pick up, I started cheering for you
Yeah I could hear you
Well done
Today's race was really sussensful
Oh, yeah, I was on the sidelines!
Did you see me pull ahead?
Yeah, you were all the way in last place!!
Yeah, I didn't even realize, I ran so hard to catch up.
Well, you won!  Congratulations!
I never thought that I would win that race.
You came out of nowhere and blew those others runners away.
I saw that I was losing and just got this burst of energy.
What do you think caused you to finding the energy to run faster?
I could hear my dad talking to me, telling me that I could do it.
He was watching out for you and gave you the boost that you needed and confidence to win.
Kendall cooked everybody lunch today.
I can still smell something good coming in the kitchen.
Kendall wanted to impress my family, so he whipped up some special dishes for everybody.
Kendall knows what he's doing. They say the quickest way to a man's heart is through his stomach.
Yeah, my family loved it and now they love Kendall too.
With the help of Kendall I really feel like my business is on good ground now.
Do you feel like you finally came up with an effective marketing strategy?
Yes! Kendall helped me with that and I am going to put her plan into action as soon as possible.
It is really good you finally think you came up with a plan to market.
I am excited to see how the business improves now that we have came up with something.
I sure hope it works out for you. I know how long and hard you have been working at that.
Kendall thought that sending out a catalogue to surrounding potential clients would work and I agreed, so we did it!
Wow, that sounds like a great marketing plan.
Yes, it has brought a lot of attention to our company.
That's great for you!
Yes, and I am thinking of giving Kendall a raise.
Well, if it's her plan that is bringing in business, she deserves it.
I hired Kendall to work with me on marketing.
That's cool, Kendall is really good at that stuff.
I know, her plan for the company was really in depth.
With her on your team, your business will be blooming in no time.
I feel like a movie star walking around with this gold Rolex watch.
You got a Rolex? Where did you get that kind of money working at Taco Bell?
It was a birthday present from my uncle who lives in Italy.
I wish I had an uncle like that. Mine only send me a card.
He's got a vineyard and makes tons of money selling his wine.
I'd love to try some of your uncle's wine if you ever get a bottle.
Oh my God. My boyfriend got me something extravagant for my Birthday!
Let me guess. Jewellery?
Yes. Diamond earrings! I love them!
Wow. That says a lot. He must be a great guy.
He is. It's not just the earrings. It's him.
Yes. It's always the person giving the gift. Not just the gift itself.
I can't tell you how happy I was with the birthday present from my Mom!
Wow, so sorry I forgot your birthday was yesterday, happy belated birthday!  How was it?
That's ok, and thanks, it was great!
What did your Mom give you?
She gave me the watch that I'd been wanting, remember the one I'd told you about?
The one you've been drooling about for weeks, yeah I remember.  Your Mom's the best!
I feel miserable after losing all my money gambling
I think you really have a bad gambling problem Sasha
I know, I can't even afford my house, because I spent so much money last week
well lets take the bus to Vegas and maybe you can get your money back
sounds like a good plan to me
I finally told the boss off today. He keeps stealing my ideas.
That is great. What did he say?
He was shocked and denied it of course .
You may have to go above his head .
I don't want to go to HR, but I may have to.
I finally got my hair cut. It was driving me crazy - sticking out all over the place.
What did you do with your hair?
I decided to have my hair cut like Kendall's. I like the way his looks.
Me, too. I look forward to see your new hair.
I'm very worried. I feel like this isn't over yet.
Why? You thought the company was going to shut down your division, and that's what happened.
I don't know, I just got a weird feeling. Like there are bigger rumblings going on...
Don't be paranoid. It'll be fine once your transfer is complete.
Wait, I'm getting a text. Oh my God, the whole company is shutting down. For good.
Uh oh. I guess your instincts were right.
Oh my God, Lee got the tickets I wanted for my birthday!!!!!
Of course he did, he knows how much this concert means to you
Lee is the absolute best, we are going to have so much fun!
I hope so! Those tickets must be expensive 
I am so excited, I can believe I'm going!
I am glad this makes you happy, Lee is really great
I turned in my art project today, I am still not happy with it.
I saw the picture of it on the website, it looks amazing.
There were so many things wrong with it.
Didn't you say you spent all day rebuilding it to fix it.
I did and it still had so many tiny imperfections.
Well, from the teacher's reaction and everyone's comments, I think its the best project in the class.
I just can't get this project right.
What's wrong with it.
The tower is not quite straight, the color is a little off, the windows aren't positioned correctly.
It's just an artistic structure; it doesn't have to be perfect.
I want it to be.
I think it looks good right now--don't keep making yourself crazy.
We had to leave the family reunion early this year.
Why?
There's some fight going on with my cousins and it made everyone so uncomfortable.
Oh, families can be tough.
Yes. But we got out of there politely so I hope we don't get involved.
Me either. That was good planning on your part, to escape.
Remind me to never host a family get together again.
Everyone knows those are always a disaster. What happened?
I thought I'd be a good person and host this year's family reunion. But of course my parents got into a fight. It was so awkward.
I don't know why they don't just get divorced. They never get along.
I know. It's so embarrassing. I actually asked them to leave. Believe it or not they did.
I bet the party was better after that.
I just had a family reunion and it went about as terribly as it could possibly go. We had a really tense argument.
Families can be tricky. What did you do?
I couldn't handle it after the argument. I asked my parents to leave and then I left.
Sometimes you have to walk away from bad situations. Maybe you did the right thing by leaving.
I don't understand why everyone can't just get along ,at least for one day!
Who couldn't get a long with each other today?
My entire family! Of course when you have a family reunion, it has to turn uncomfortable and become tense which leads to arguments.
That doesn't sound very fun at all, did you end up staying?
No, I asked my parents to leave because I couldn't take the tension anymore.
Well at least you got out in one piece!
They tried to get me to give them 50 percent of the royalties.
You have to look over the contract in detail.
I did, I read all the fine print like you told me to.
Would you like me to go over the contract?
I had June do that, and I was able to get the agreement that I wanted.
I think I really need to revaluate what is going on here so I can truly remember the facts and such.  I like the agreement
I am glad you do.  there is a lot of stuff in here that needs to be redefined
Yeah, there are a lot of things in there that need to be taken care of
right right.  I am glad you are able to notice the fine print
so true
you are one smart friend
I am not sure I fully understand the agreement terms.
You’ve been reading that fine print for over an hour.
Yes, but they make the writing so technical and easy to misunderstand.
You are doing a fine job analyzing it.
Thank you, now I have to figure out how to explain it.
I am sure that you will figure it out.
I was just playing and joking around and actually having a lot of fun.
What were you doing?
I just pushed a boy into the pool hahaha
Do you know the guy? Does the guy know how to swim?
I don't know, It was just a harmless joke, come on!
You don't know what could happened, be careful with your actions.
I pushed the boy in the pool as a joke
That's not very funny
it was harmless
did he get hurt?
not at all, he laughed
okay, looks like you were lucky and he was able to swim
I'm sorry, I wouldn't have pushed him in the pool if I knew he couldn't swim!
Why did he push him in anyway?
We were all joking around, everyone was pushing everyone in, it was just a harmless prank
It isn't harmless when that boy didn't know how to swim
No one knew that, why was he at the pool if he didn't know how to swim?
Now that is a good question!
I can't get a hold of the targets on this videogame.
Kill their darlings instead!
Hurry give me the guns.
Just load the bullets and fire at once.
I killed them already.
Go hide and remove the traces.
Damn it, my opponent when I was playing this new videogame got away, but I took care of business.
What do you mean you took care of business?
well, after he went offline, I took matters into my own hands.
Oh man Remy. What did you do?
I logged in with his account and I killed all of his darlings there. All of them.
Oh man poor things. You should have sold them instead.
You all should go ahead and eat. I'll start cleaning up this mess I made.
Taylor, you should join us since you cooked everything!
It's fine - I like to clean up and take out the trash before I eat.
Ok, everything looks really good though.
Thank you, I hope you enjoy it.
Thanks for cleaning up too!
I just finished cleaning up my kitchen and getting the trash out.
I don't envy you. I hate cleaning.
I'm the other way. I love cleaning, and then seeing my nice clean kitchen afterwards.
I hate having a dirty kitchen, but I also hate the cleaning part. So I do it, but I hate it.
I think I'm one of the only people who actually enjoys it.
I think you're right. I don't know anyone else who actually enjoys it!
I am fussy about my kitchen.
I have seen that in the past.
After cooking, I like to clean up the kitchen.
No mess, no bugs is something I always say.
My last step after cooking is to throw away any trash.
Oh no, the last step after cooking is to eat, so let's eat.
I have been so stress-free lately, it feels amazing.
What have you been doing differently?
I have just learned to live and let others live so that we can live together peacefully with other members of society.
That sounds great. I should really try that out.
I think you should, it has really changed the way I view the world.
Thank you for the advice, I will definitely try it out.
I went out to get some groceries and this guy in line wasn't wearing a mask.
Was he coughing and stuff?
Not coughing, but he kept chatting me up and it was a bit unnerving. I guess I didn't do anything since I have learned to live and let live.
What did he want to talk about?
He was just saying how he didn't think corona was a big deal and all that. I told him that I hoped he, and all of us, got through this ok despite our differences.
You're more diplomatic that I would have been!
I'm going to live peacefully with others.
yeah, just live and let live, that's the secret, right?
that's right!
focus on yourself.
and others are going to do the same.
very wise words.
I want a peaceful life in this society.
That is true. We must all live in harmony.
My motto has always been, live and let live.
That is fair enough, right?
I am thankful to my parents for having me to the right direction in life.
They sure did. That’s why I love them.
You won't believe what happened to me a couple of days ago.
What?? Tell me.
I was kidnapped and being held against my will! I managed to get free though just yesterday.
You're kidding!! How did you break free?
I just kept working the knot over and over when he wasn't around and when I got free I flew out of that house!
I'm just glad you're okay! That could have gone really bad for you.
I need you to call the police for me.
Is everything okay?
Someone was holding me captive and while they were distracted I ran away.
Were they men or women?
Two men in black masks.
Okay, I will call the police.
I am glad that I made it out of there alive. My boyfriend is a disgusting person that I hope spends the rest of his life in prison.
I can't believe that he held you captive in the basement for a week.
He has mental problems.  I will never talk to him again unless it is in court.
What did you do for food and water?
He would give me enough to survive.  I am a little dehydrated still though.
He is a horrible person.
Their speech didn't turn out so well.
How did it go?
They sounded monotone, and their voices were low. Also, they didn't speak accurately about the topic.
Did you give them a bad grade, Lee?
I told them that I would give them another chance. They can rewrite their speech and recite it next week.
I hope that they'll fix the mistakes and provide a better performance.
The speech seemed awkward and bulky even after two rewrites.
I think you've edited enough times.
I gave it another rewrite. Third draft's a charm.
Are you finally satisfied with the contents?
Yes, and since it's less awkward, it's easier to memorize as well.
Do you mind if I read it first?
I thought the speech could have been so much better!
Why? They didn't do a good job.
Well, I'm not sure, but I did feel the need to rewrite it.
I hear you! That happens sometimes unfortunately.
Yeah, we made it work.
Good! I know you are good at that stuff.
I needed a tooth pulled and Carson tried to do it at home.
That's downright stupid, Quinn.
I know. He ended up just chipping the tooth with a hammer.
It probably looks a lot worse now.
It does. I wish we hadn't tried to do something.
Carson tried to remove my tooth for me.
And why can't you just see a dentist?
I don't have insurance, and this tooth is bothering me.
You can go to dentists that offer payment plans, and low income pricing.
I didn't know that.
I'll send you some links, just please stop.
I was watching out to see if my neighbors were going to cut those branches hanging over into my yard.
That tree is really dangerous. Have you talked to them about it?
Yeah. Mr. Riley said he was going to trim the branches on their side that hang over on my side.
It looks like they are still working on it.
Yeah. I think they are working their way around the tree.
I think you'll be happy with the results.
I was kind of fortunate this morning.
What happened?
I fell head first off my bike?
Oh, my gosh--are you injured?
Not really.  I covered my head with my hands and then rolled.
Lucky you know how to fall.
I was riding my skateboard and hit a huge rock in the street.
Did you fall off your board?
I went flying off my board.
Were you injured?
I have some cuts and scrapes, but I covered my head as I was rolling on the ground.
That's a good reaction, you could be worse off.
When I was a kid I wanted to play the piano.
Did you ever learn?
No, that's why I'm going to sign up my kids for lessons, I want them to learn.
Just don't push them too hard if they don't like it.
I took my kids to piano lessons today
learning piano at such a young age is amazing
i think they will really appreciate learning how to play piano when they get older
it's always nice to know a skill  I guess
I had to apply my navigation skills to get us home so that we can sleep in our own bed.
Were you with Nancy?
Yes my wife and I went on a road trip and we took a road home that we've never been on.  We were tired and couldn't think straight.
How long were you driving?
I had been driving for twenty-four hours straight with a couple of nap breaks.
That sounds like a long stretch.
I absolutely love this new home we found together!
Thanks to your superb navigation skills, it sounds like you found a gem.
Can’t believe I found such an extraordinary place! But finding the way back was hard though, I had to put my way of navigating home into practice.
I am in awe as much as you are, Cameron.
Can’t wait to tell the rest of our friends about this place.
Me neither, this is going to be so much fun!
I finished my spreadsheet to help me find the perfect home.
Oh that's great! You've been working on that for a while.
Yeah, I started putting into practice this week. I have a few places I'm going to check out on Saturday.
And they meet all your requirements?
More or less. I weighted each requirement differently and then used a formula to come up with a final score. The spreadsheet highlights anything with a score over 80.
Wow you should patent that formula!
I went to see my brother Quinn last week.
That must have been hard for him.
The past growing up together was so hard so it did jog some unpleasant memories for Quinn.
I am sorry you have such a hard past.
Well I told Quinn we have to live for the future.
That's right , we can't move forward if we don't.
I remembered my past.
What past are you referring?
My traumatic past.
I guess you must be on Quinn's head too now, you are so close. Do you want to talk with him?
I will do it.
Quinn  will listen to you.
I remember when Quinn and I were kids and one of us got hit by a car
I remember you also got hit and were in the hospital for weeks
same for Quinn except he had more broken bones
that is true, it was so scary at the time
I think about what happened sometimes and just tremble
really, Quinn probably does too, it must be something that will never go away
Quinn called me the other day out of the blue.
Did he want to talk about the accident?
Yes, I just did not know what say to him.
Did you tell him that you forgive him for drinking? That is what he wants
I don't know if I can ever forgive him.
Forgiveness is the only way that you will be free.
I've been thinking a lot about Quinn lately.
You two have been through a lot together.
I've had some traumatic things happen to me in the past, and Quinn was usually there when it happened.
I'm glad you two can get into each other's heads about it. Not everybody has such close friendships.
I know. I'm really grateful.
I checked my kid after someone in his class had lice, but I didn't see any lice so far
Did you look good?
I've looked over every inch of his hair.
Does his head feels itchy?
He didn't say he feels itchy
It should be fine them, but I would also still be worried
Can you please help me check my son's head when he gets home from school?
Sure I will.  What happened?  Did he get hurt?
No, nothing like that.  But some of the kids in his class have head lice!  His teacher just called me and told me about it....Oh, here is his bus now.  Let's go ahead and get ready.
Ok.  Let's get it done!  With both of us checking it won't take too long at all.
So we've been checking for about an hour!  I haven't found a single lice, so I think he's ok.
I think so too.  I would check every couple of days, though.  It's a lot easier to stop an infestation before they set up a community in his hair and start a society in there.
I'm still creeped out. The thought of it just makes me sick.
It's pretty gross. But you didn't find anything?
I inspected every inch of that boy's scalp. No lice to be found.
Thank God. Did they take that other boy out of class?
The kid who had it, you mean? I think so. He better not be there tomorrow.
I know. That's the kind of problem that is not easy to get rid of.
Jordan and I went to the baseball game.
Did you have a fun time?
Yeah, but the concession stand food there is expensive.
What did you get.
I got us both a hot dog and a beer, and it cost me an arm and a leg.
You can't have baseball without a hot dog.
I bought hot dogs and beer at the concession stand at the baseball game last week.
I think I got food poisoning at that place before.
Was this at the stadium where Jordan and I attended the baseball game?
Yeah, that stand even has bad ratings online.
Well, this was four days ago, so I think we're in the clear.
I just bring my own food to games now.
I went to the baseball game with Jordan.
That was a nice thing to do for your little brother.
I bought a hot dog and a beer for both him and me.
Jordan is only eleven.
He ate my hot dog and I drank his beer.
Any excuse to get hammered I see.
When I met my girlfriend that was it.  I knew I had met my soulmate and I was in love.
Oh, that's so sweet.  How did you two meet?
A blind date.  One of my other friends knew her and thought we'd make a great match.
Sounds like your friend new both of you well.
Obviously, because he was spot on.  She and I are perfect for each other.
I can't wait to meet her.
I didn't really think love at first sight happened.
Now your telling me it did?
Yes, I knew the moment I saw here that I loved her.
That's pretty awesome.
It is the best feeling in the world.
I hope it works out for you guys.
I just met my girlfriend in person.
Did you meet her on an online dating site?
No, actually it was on a gaming site.
I see. And how did you feel about it?
I fell in love with her. She's even more beautiful and charismatic in person.
I'm so happy for you!
Wow, I got these flowers in the mail.
Pretty! Who are they from?
I don't know! It just says secret admirer.
Aww that's sweet. Where are you going to put them?
I think in my kitchen. I had to get a cheap vase, I didn't have one.
Haha yeah, it's not something you think about needing.
I don't know who sent these flowers but I love them and just picked up this cheap vase for them at lunch.
Are you going to keep them on your desk?
Yes and the vase is perfect for them even if I don't know who they're from.
Maybe the person who sent them will see them and admit it.
That's what I am hoping.
Let me know who it is if you find out.
Look at these gorgeous flowers someone sent me!
Wow, they are pretty! That was very nice of someone.
Hmm I don't have any vases, I'm going to have to go buy one
Try the dollar store, they usually have a bunch and cheap!
Aw thanks for the suggestion, I got one at a discounted price and it is perfect.
Now you can display your pretty flowers on the counter.
I don’t understand why my family cannot accept Casey.
Maybe it’s because she’s friends with other girls that have bad reputations.
Maybe, but that doesn’t give my family the right to tell me who to be friends with.
They are only looking out for your best interest.
They are interfering with my life and Casey is an extraordinary person.
Well, hopefully, you can prove your parent’s wrong.
I've befriended Casey.
Do you think that's a good idea?
You're just like my parents--warning me about Casey.
Well, he is known as a bad boy.
I need a little excitement in my life.
Just be careful.
I know you and my parents don't like Casey, but she's a great person.
Sasha, nobody else that we hang out with thinks you should be friends with Casey.
I can't believe that you are all judging her because she has gotten into a little trouble with the police.
Being arrested multiple times with drugs is not a little trouble.
You sound like my mom and I don't really care what you think.
I hope you are right then because Casey is going to cause you to lose the friends you have.
My friends and parents warned me about Casey.  They think he's trouble.
Why do they say that?
Casey has a reputation of stringing along a lot of girls.  He plays with their emotions.
Is that such a bad thing?  He's not a killer or anything.
My family and friends just want me to hang out with better people.
Choosing your friends wisely is very important.
I had a nice trip down memory lane today when I was cleaning Sasha's room.
Memory lane? Why, what do you mean?
I ran across a bunch of old yearbooks from junior high and high school in Jan's room. What memories!
Oh, I love that! I can't even find my school yearbooks. They're in the attic somewhere, but who knows where?
What's really weird is how many people from back then that I've totally forgotten about. It's all so distant now.
Yeah, hard to believe it felt so important when we were living through it. It all felt like life and death.
You know Jan is my roommate, right?
Yes, I've met her once or twice.
Right. Anyway, I was cleaning her room yesterday and found some stuff from High School.
What kind of stuff did you find?
Mainly a stack of old yearbooks. You should see her high school pictures LOL!
I guess they looked pretty silly!
I think I learned my lesson and will make sure I get no more F.
You probably are going to see leaves in your dreams.
Leaves are going to haunt me for the rest of my life after all that raking as a punishment.
If you need help just let me know.
Help with the leaves or with my work?
The work buddy, I'm nor raking leaves!
I can't go out today.
Why not?
I got punished because I got an f at school.
Oh, are you grounded?
No, but I have to spend the day raking leaves as my punishment.
That doesn't sound fun!
I don't see why and F is so bad.
Your parents want what is best for you.
But I hate raking leaves!
That is why it is called a punishment.
I'm gonna study really hard next time.
That's the spirit!
Did you know that I’m getting promoted finally.
Oh wow, Addison got you a new position?
Yep, after all the years of hard work I’m finally getting promoted.
What’s going to be your pay increase?
They’re currently working that out right now.
I hope it’s something substantial for the position that you’re going to be getting.
I am so glad that I made the necessary changes to save my family business.
You did the right thing, Robin, you are a true hero.
If only my family understood the financial sacrifices that I’ve had to make.
How exactly did you do it?
I reduced the deficit and expenditures by saving money wherever I could.
I am proud of you Robin.
If I didn't do something to save the family business, I was going to lose it soon.  I reduced the deficit by reducing expenditures and I was able to keep the business in the family.
Those accounting classes came in handy.
I hated accounting classes when I took them, but I find myself applying a lot of the principles I've learned in real life.
That's the exciting part.
Business in the real world is exciting, not the classes.
I can't keep myself awake in class.  I am so bored.
We are in danger of losing our family business.
What are you going to do?
I think if we can reduce expenditures, we can keep it.
How are you going to that?
Mainly we'll have to cut non-employee hours and do more work ourselves.
That will be hard, but worth it.
I told Alex that my brother's goldfish, Gregory, isn't actually Gregory.
What?
He keeps dying and my dad keeps replacing him so my brother doesn't get upset, we're on like the eight one now.
That seems like a strange thing to hide, but okay.
Just don't tell anybody, my dad would actually kill me, he said so himself.
You people are weird.
I told Alex what was going on at home I needed to.
Did your dad threaten you not to?
yes but this is serious, my mom and I are in danger
you need to also tell the police
I know, I'm scared
you won't get hurt rest assured
can I join you guys?
sure, why not? you can come with us
what are you guys going wearing to the carnival?
we have costumes, the ones from last year.
that is great, let me get mine.
fine, we will wait here for you to get ready.
I finally got out of my work schedule to go to the carnival with my friends.
How did you manage that?
I told my boss that I had severe cramps and keep keeling over.
That one always works for you.
I know. I put his hands over his ears and said just go home.
You know your boss volunteered to work the ticket booth at the carnival tonight.
I didn't think I could make it to the carnival, but I managed to clear out my schedule and I can go now.
I thought you had a ton of work to do.
I did, and I had to jump through a lot of hoops to finish everything before the carnival started. But I managed it.
I'm glad you're coming along. I saved your ticket just in case.
I probably shouldn't steal this game
I cant believe you even thought about doing it
well, I really liked it and my dad doesn't buy me anything, but then I heard Sydney's voice in my head telling me not to.
that doesn't mean you should just take mine though
you're right, I'm sorry I tried to steal it.
get out of my house you thief
I was playing video games with Ralph.
He has a ton of games.
I was tempted to steal his old version of Mario Cart.
Did you steal it?
I heard Sydney's voice in my head telling me not to do it so I didn't.
Sydney is your conscience.
I was in the mall in a game store and about it steal one when I heard my friend tell me not to do it.
Like, in your head or she called you?
In my head, I realized that she wouldn't have approved of this behavior because she has gotten upset at me before for doing stuff like this.
So you really like her then don't you?
I mean yeah, I guess I do if thinking about her stopped me from stealing something.
Maybe you should tell her that and ask her if she feels the same way.
I feel so much better since I took that long nap.  I had a tough workout at the gym this morning.
I love long naps.
I feel like I have regained my strength.  I feel like a million bucks.
Too bad you had to sleep on the couch.  Your bed would have been much better.
Well the kids were watching Netflix in my room so I decided to nap on the couch.
I needed a refresher nap today after the gym.
Was it a tough workout?
It took a lot out of me so I just laid down a bit and fell into a nice nap.
I love taking naps.
Me too. This one totally refreshed me too. Now I can go out to eat.
Tell me where and I'll meet you.
I had an embarrassing moment at lunch today.
What happened?
I was going to buy my pizza lunch and when I was about to pay, I did not have my wallet.
Oh no that stinks! So what happened afterwards?
Well Rick was nice enough to pay for it, and I told him I would pay him back.
Yeah, Rick is a quality dude.
My lunch was delicious today.
It sure was.
I wanted to pay for lunch for me and my friend.
That is so kind of you.
Yeah, but when I went to pay I realised I left my wallet at home. I felt so sorry.
No problem. You can pay for your friend's lunch next time.
I felt like such an idiot yesterday when I went to lunch with Jeff and Tyler.
Why? I thought they were your close friends.
Oh, they are. It's just that I was going to buy them lunch, but left my wallet at home.
I'm sure they understood. It can happen to anyone.
Yeah, I know. But still.
Well, I'm sure you'll take care of them next time. Don't even worry about it.
I think Jesse thought I was being too nosy the other day.
Why, where you questioning him or something?
A little. I saw him take something out of a coat pocket on the coat rack at school and asked what he was doing.
Well, was it his coat?
I didn't think it was. Turns out it WAS his coat.  It was different from the one I recognized because he had just bought it.
Oh. I get it. Oops. Well at least he knows you look out for people. How would you know he'd just bought a new coat?
Do you know what's up with Jesse recently?
Not really. Life is boring.
I heard through the grapevine differently.
What have you heard? My life is boring and I'm sure Jesse's too.
I heard she won the lottery and won't share the wealth.
Whoever told you that is a liar.
I don't know how Addison knew about the accident so fast but he meet me at the emergency room.
I guess the emergency workers found his number and called him.
I'm so happy that they did. I was so upset and nervous about having the accident. I couldn't give them anybody's number.
You are also lucky that Addison picked up. They called in the middle of his meeting.
Thank God he had his phone on and in front of him.
Yes. Thank God. Addison was right there for you.
I got into a bad accident last week.
What happened?
A car cut me off and I couldn't hit my breaks in time.
Did you have to go to the hospital?
Yes, they took me to the emergency room. I called my friend Addison and she met me in the emergency room.
That's great that you have such good friends.
Everything hurts so much.  I didn't see that car coming from that direction.
Yeah, its important that you know that overall the process will take a while, but I am sure that you will encounter a speedy recovery.  Most people do
yeah, I am glad the pain will go away soon enough and everything will be back to normal one of these days. And also that Addison came to see me at the emergency room.
Indeed.  You are so right.  I really hope everything comes together and you are a lucky person too
I know right.  a lot of people could have died in the same predicament I was in
that is very true
I am so glad that Addison was there for me at the hospital.
What happened? Are you hurt?
I was in a car accident. Addison got the information and came right away.
I hope your injuries are not bad.
I broke a wrist, otherwise I am alright.
I will come to see you after work. Get well soon.
I knew this was going to happen.
How come you're not freaking out? Everybody else in the class is shocked by the pop quiz!
It's not a pop quiz. The teacher has been suggesting we're going to have a quiz all week. You guys just haven't been paying attention.
I guess that explains why you look so calm. I hope I don't fail it!
I knew something like this would happen.
I don't believe it! Look at all of our classmates, they are in disbelief!
Yeah, I know. I'm so glad I have been prepared for this.
Lucky you. You have always been ready for anything like this anyway.
This didn't teach everyone in the lesson. You guys ought to study hard every day.
Lesson learned. I will do just that from now on.
What is the big deal with the quiz.
I wasn't expecting this.
Well you have to be ready always.
Oh! not this time I am not ready
Write what you can recall, after all its a general knowledge quiz.
Better, my hands were getting sweaty.
Mrs. Jones gave a surprise pop quiz today!
Man, how do you think you did.
I knew what was going on and had studied the last 2 nights. The other kids had a what is going on look on their face.
Good thing you had studied and were prepared for the quiz.
I am sure a bunch of them failed.
I think I'm ready for today's test.
That's great. You're no longer having a hard time with that class?
No, I had a tutoring session with the teacher and she explained  everything to me.
Well, I wish you lots of luck today.
Thanks, it feels good not to have problems with the material.
I'm sure you'll do great.
I asked my teacher to help me with understanding the lesson.  I just didn't get it.
What class is this?
Geometry class with Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers was my Geometry teacher too.  I love the way he explains things.
He is so patient with me.  I can take a while to catch on, but once I understand it, I don't forget.
I am glad he's still teaching.  I thought he was going to retire last year.
I was having trouble understanding the lesson of the day.
You can always ask your teacher’s help.
That is exactly what I did.
Is everything clear now?
I totally understand it now. My teacher was a great help.
That is the right way to do it.
Well, that was a long gruelling experience but we're not done. Got to go back tomorrow.
So how did the evidence displayed hurt your case?
Evidence? There was evidence?
Did the prosecutor grill you long enough on the stand?
What prosecutor?
Are you ready to appeal the verdict? Are you hiring a new defense team?
I am private about what is happening in this case.
Why. Isn't it public knowledge?
Not the hearing itself. It is a closed case.
So only people in the courtroom really knew what's happening?
You got it. And the judge is strict on who he allows to sit in the courtroom.
OK. You know everybody is going to want your story when this is over.
My lawyer told me not to speak about the case.
Is that why you haven't been saying anything about what happened in court?
Yes, I know you guys have many questions, but I can't answer them right now.
I'm sorry if we've been bothering you, but we care about you.
I appreciate the concern, and someday I'll be able to talk more freely about things.
No worries, take your time and get all that legal stuff taken care of.
My home was destroyed in a freak storm.
Do you have home insurance?
No. friends and neighbours called to offer me help.
That's so considerate of them. did you accept the offer?
I accepted every offer.
I can't express how much this means to me.
Just doing whatever we can do, this storm came out of nowhere and if we're not here for each other then who will be?
Yeah, but letting me stay here while I find a new place to live was more than anyone could have asked for.
I had space, you needed somewhere to go, it wasn't hard to think of a solution.
I promise I'll pay you back as soon as I can.
Don't even worry about it, you need that money right now more than I do.
Just called everyone to wish them a Merry Chrismas!
Merry Chrismas to you too my friend!
You know I love you.
I love you too.
You have to come for a visit soon.
I already have one planned for next month.
I am really feeling the holiday spirit and really love everyone! Merry Christmas!
Merry Christmas too you to Lee!
I really really mean it! Merry Chritmas!
Okay, same to you Lee. Love you too!
Merry Christmas!! Really Merry Christmas!!
Okay, someone put the egg nog away!!
I just got through calling my friends and family and wishing them a Merry Christmas and telling them I love them.
That is nice.
It was wonderful to talk to them.
That sounds like a good idea.  I need to call my parents.
You will be glad you did.
I finally found the best candidate for the job today.
Who is it and how good of a fit are they?
Well they have a masters in accounting and worked at a business doing forensic accounting for a couple years so I would say he qualifies.
That is a pretty good record to be honest.
I went through the hiring process for a month before I found him.
I bet that was pretty stressful.
I had a pretty tough time picking the best candidate for this role.
How did you end up deciding on who to choose?
I offered the job to the best candidate after thoroughly going through all of the applications.
Do you think you made the right pick?
Yes, I think the candidate I picked is the most qualified for the job.
Awesome, congratulations!
I felt that after all this time I finally found the right person for the job.
Sometimes great things take a long time.
I’ve learned that through life.
No I don’t you have your team together when are you going to start creating things?
I’ll give it about a couple weeks to get everybody settled in.
I can’t wait to see what you guys come up with.
I used Austin's research from the science project on mine too.
Ok. That's fine. I think that's what the teacher wanted us to do.
I really dislike science. It's my least favorite class.
Well, I can help whenever if you need more help with your project.
Really? That would be great.
Yeah. No problem.
I was having a lot of trouble on the assignment.
Oh really? What was your task?
We were supposed to find a way to keep an egg from breaking when dropped from a great height.
That's interesting. How did your testing go?
Well, I ended up using Austin's hypothesis because he has been doing so well in the class.
Sounds like you took the easy way out.
What languages are you taking again?
Japanese and French.
I am taking French as well!
How do you like it?
Well, I'm not fluent yet but I've learned so much.
Honestly you might want to study abroad to help you become better at it.
I can speak French
When did you learned it?
I took an elective in high school
So we can go to France
Sure, I can be your interpreter.
So next year our destination is France.
I got a new job.
Why?
I was tired of the last one.
Oh I see.  Where is your new job?
It's at Wal-Mart.
Ah.  Is it fun?
I've been working here at the Amazon Warehouse for far too long.
Definitely, the hours are long and the work is physically hard.
I decided to switch and now I'm working at Target.
Oh, that's a great new job to have!
I'm much happier now and think it's a good place to be.
I'm very happy that you switched and did what was best for you.
I just couldn't handle the issues any longer.
I'm surprised you found another job so soon.
It really wasn't so soon. I've been looking for several months.
Oh, I thought you just quit and got a new job right away.
Oh, no. I did a lot of work on my resume and did some networking.
I'm glad you found such a great job and it pays great too!
I got a new job today! One that I think I'm going to like a lot.
What happened to your other job.
I was sick of it. I hated it, I had to quit.
You're lucky you can just up and do that since you don't have any bills.
I know. The time is now if I wanted to make any changes.
Can you believe this police officer was illiterate?
I don’t know why they would hire such a person that can’t read or write.
I am going to make a formal complaint to the department tomorrow.
You should, that is unacceptable that you wrote your own ticket.
It’s outrageous is what it is!
That’s an understatement.
The first full day started today. I let the kids go outside for a short time. Then I told them to come back in for snacks.
How did it go? It must be kind of scary with the coronavirus situation.
My class was much smaller than usual because we social distanced. We all wore face masks, too.
Was it very hard to have first graders keep their masks on?
They did extremely well, considering...but I can't stop worrying about them.
Maybe you could convince the school to put up clear, plastic partitions in the classroom. I think you and the students would feel safer that way.
The kids were happy today. They are so easy to please.
Why, what happened?
I let them play an extra ten minutes at recess.
Oh, that was nice of you.
They've been doing really well in class so I think they deserved it.
We need more teachers like you!
I gave my class an extra 10 minutes for recess today.
That was nice of you.
Not really. I wanted to beat this level of Candy Crush and I couldn't do it with them in the room.
That's so funny. It was all about the game.
The only reason I got them when I did is because I saw the principal go outside.
Yeah your boss was checking up on you.
I took Robin to Red Lobster last night, it was cool.
Wow, really? Awesome! I never been there. What else happened?
We went to my place afterwards and watched Fright Night while we had cocktails next to the fireplace.
Oh nice choice, I love that movie. How did she like it?
She got very scared and cuddled up to me and grasped onto me, so I held her close too. I was getting really excited. She is so soft, we stood that way the whole movie.
Oh I bet you did. She is super hot, I can't believe she actually went out with you. That is a scary movie though, especially if it's your first time seeing it. She must have been frightened.
Did you see the scary movie that was on TV last night?
No, did you watch it?
Yeah, I watched it with Robin.
Was it scary?
Yeah, we held each other close the entire time.
I'm glad I didn't watch it alone.
I gave my son Tyler a puppy for his Birthday!
Wow! He must have been super happy about that.
Yes, he was. I also got him a dog bowl and food.
Did he name the puppy yet?
Not yet, but I know he loves the pup, because he slept with him in his room.
That is really awesome. Can't wait to see the new puppy myself.
It was my son's birthday.
How did you celebrate?
I gave him a puppy.
He must have been thrilled.
He also got a dog bowl and dog food and instructions on caring for the puppy.
That was the right way to go about it.
It was my little boy's birthday yesterday.  I got him his very first puppy!
Really?  That's so sweet!  Did you get food and stuff for the puppy too?
Yeah, I got some good puppy chow and a bowl with his name on it.
I bet your son was so happy.  What did he name his new puppy?
I had to laugh but it was kind of cool too...he named him Dogasaurus Rex!
Hahaha!  That's such an awesome name for a kid's best friend!
I just got a surprise for my son for his birthday?
Really, what is the surprise?
I got him a puppy along with a dog bowl and dog food.
That sounds like a nice gift.  Does he know yet?
No we will be surprising him with it tomorrow.
I wish I could be there to join in with the surprise.
We gave Michael a puppy for his birthday.
What kind of puppy did you guys get them?
We got him a bloodhound.
Those are great dogs, is he liking it?
So far so good, they’re like best friends.
That’s great as they will grow up together and be inseparable.
I couldn't sleep last night.
Oh no. Did you just stay in bed all night?
No, I went and got something to eat.
Don't eat too much if you want to sleep better.
I'm going to the fridge for a snack.
Why?
I'm so hungry and need that pizza we had.
I understand it's important to eat well though.
Let me get that bite though.
That's so funny.
I've been waking up in the middle of the night lately.
Do you know why?
I think I've been hungry so I walked across the floor to the refrigerator and made a midnight snack.
Next time, wake me up too and we can eat together.
Taylor had an equation on the board.
Did you try and solve it?
Yes, I did after analyzing it on the black board.
I tried too but it was too hard for me.
Practice makes perfect.
Maybe one day I can learn from you.
It was hard but I finally got Taylor's equation.
Did you really, let me see?
I was able to solve the equation, just take a look at the black board.
That is impressive! I thought it would take you more time.
It was really hard, I almost gave up.
Good thing you didn't, great work.
Do you know about that equation Taylor has been having trouble with?
The one on the blackboard?
Yeah, that one, I think I solved it.
Wow, that's a difficult equation.
I hope Taylor isn't mad.
You can keep it a secret from Taylor and give hints about how to solve it.
My parents really like the ring I bought for my girlfriend.
Oh, what kind of ring is it?
It's a sapphire ring with some diamonds also.
Wow, she's a lucky girl! When did you show it to your parents?
This morning. I wanted to get their opinion before Christmas.
Your mom has a lot of nice jewelry. She's probably a good judge.
Mom and dad said she would like it
Like what
The ring I bought for my girlfriend
You are such a sweetheart
I'm pretty sure she's gonna love it
I want to propose to my girlfriend
Did you get a ring already?
I showed the ring to my parents.
What for?
I wanted them to see if it was something she would like.
That was a good idea probably
I am so thankful for Alex he was there for me the entire time while I was in the ER
Alex seems to be a great friend
Yes, he surely is
Did he stay the entire time or did he have to leave
No he stayed there until he had to leave to go to work.
People like Alex are rare these days
I had to go to the ER last week.  It was really scary.  Alex stayed with me until he had to leave for work.
I'm sorry to hear that.  What was wrong?
I fell off my bike and thought I'd broken my arm. But it ended up being a bad sprain.
Oh no.  Had they done the x-rays before Alex needed to leave?
Yes.  I was just waiting for the results when he had to leave.  He felt terrible but I told him he should go.
Yes, I can imagine it was hard for him to just leave you.
I have been sick in the ER.
Oh no, I hope you feel better soon. Do you need someone to be with you?
Alex has been right here by my side but had to leave to go to work.
That's too bad.
I asked Taylor where my bike is.
And what did he say?
I think he said he lost it?
I heard he borrowed it to go to the store, and now it's gone.
Didn't he lock it up?
No, he told me he was only going in for a couple of minutes,. I'm so sorry Alex, I hope Taylor didn't get your bike stolen.
Do you need my bike at all?
Actually yeah I would love to use your bike because mine is acting very weird.
Okay no problem, but I have to wait for Taylor to give it back when he is done.
Okay great. I think I saw him leaving the bike right here as he went inside of the store.
I am not sure he should have done that though.
Why not?
I just saw the best comedy show ever.
Was it really that good?
It's one of the best stand up comedy shows I have ever seen.
Must be really funny who did you go with.
I went there with a couple of friends, I am still laughing because of the jokes.
You should tell the name so that I can also see it.
I was on a stand up show!
That's why you moved out there.
True, LA is amazing.
You are really funny!
Thanks, I try my best.
Just make sure to rest.
I think I am going cross-eyed.
Why do you say that?
I am really shooting for an A plus on my paper.  So I have read and re-read it so many times to make sure it was perfect.
I bet you could recite it from memory by now.
I think I will be dreaming about that paper for a long time.
Good luck, I do hope you get an A after all your hard work.
I finished the paper but I'm still checking it over.
How many times have you checked it now?
A few but I want to get a good grade so I keep rechecking for errors.
You probably should take a break and then go back to it.
You're right or I'll get my friend to read it too.
Good idea and good luck. I'm sure it's good.
Want to go celebrate, I finally turned in my psychology paper today.
I thought you were never going to finish it.
I really want a good grade so I just needed to make sure that there were no errors when I was proofreading it.
Did you find any mistakes?
There were only two and I fixed both of them so I feel really confident now.
Sounds like we need to go celebrate then!
I ordered 250 dollars worth of stuff online with my mom's credit card.
Oh my gosh! Why did you do that?
I just wanted the stuff I guess, but my mom was so angry she grounded me for 2 weeks.
I guess you deserved that though if you spent so much of her money.
Yeah I do. I feel really bad I did that.
I can see why. I would feel terrible too.
I probably shouldn't have dressed up as a clown and scare my dad
probably a bad idea since your dad is having heart problems lately
I thought it would be a funny joke and not scary at all
you know your dad told you he was scared of clowns ever since he was a kid
I guess I didn't think he would be that scared though
Well, I'm grounded for two weeks. What am I going to do?
Oh, that sucks. We were going to go to the party together.
I know but I'm out. You all will be having fun while I stay home playing games.
I'll keep you up to date on all the goings-on.
I appreciate that. You know, I feel kind of guilty putting my parents through all of this.
I get to feeling the same way, sometimes.
It's so great to be home for Christmas.
When do you go back to school?
I register for classes January 18.
What's best about being home?
Lots of things, but most of all seeing my little brother Quinn.
Yes, you guys are so close.
I have practices everyday.
How are they going.
hard but this builds character.
That's the spirit.
Thanks I've been under a lot of pressure.
Pressure builds diamonds.
I want to be the best that I can be.
What are you doing to accomplish that goal?
I practice every day.
Practice makes perfect they say.
I hope that is true because the work is really hard and fast paced.
You are on the right track my friend.
I have to go to baseball practice today.
Wow, you are practicing and working out so much these days.
It's a hard game and fast paced as well.
Yeah, you need to be ready for the fall when the season starts.
I'm trying every day to get better and better.
I think you will have a great second year on the university team.
I have practice again today.
You sound disappointed.
I am a little bit.  They just wear me out so much.
Well they say, no pain no gain.
I know this is true which is why I am not giving up.
Good for you!
I only speak English and this woman was speaking Chinese, I had no clue what she was saying
Oh no, how did you finish the convo?
I just used hand gestures, and she started using them to and pointed me in the direction of a place to eat
Is that what you wanted
Haha yes I was trying to find a nice restaurant
Well I'm glad you got it figured out!
I had a tough time understanding the lady at the shop.
What language does she speak?
She was Chinese.
What were you trying to get?
They were a set of bowls and cups that I wanted to get but she didn’t understand me.
I know someone who can speak Chinese that you can bring with you.
Been feeling great these days.
Why is that?
Even though I broke up with my spouse last year, things have been turning out great for me.
Well, that's good to hear.
Hopefully it will continues.
Wishing you the best.
I broke up with my spouse last year
And how are you feeling after that?
yes, still happy
that's good to hear, right?
I just love this time of year, Christmas is my favorite holiday.
You are so happy Remy.
You say that like you are surprised.
I am a little. I mean you broke up with your spouse a year ago.
I know but that doesn't mean I can't be happy.
You're right, I guess I just thought this time of year would be hard for you.
I promised my friends I will see them later for lunch.
Are you meeting them over at the cafeteria?
I guess I need to meet my family for lunch today.
But you said you were going to eat with the crew?
I know but it is a family emergency.
I will let them know why you aren't there then, I guess it can't be helped.
I feel so bad for telling everyone I would eat lunch with them
did you eat somewhere else without them?
I ditched everyone and just went over my family's house instead
you should apologize since you promised them you would eat lunch together
yeah, I probably should
When I got home today, my cat and dog were both waiting at the door for me.
Were they excited to see you?
I think it was me who was the most excited. I missed them so much after being away.
How long were you gone?
I went away for the week.
I guess when you live with them every day, that's a long time.
I drove out to mom and dads and picked up my cat and my bird yesterday
What made you decide to do that
I went into a pet store and realized that I really miss them a lot
Why haven't you been able to see them?
I have been away from home now for a long time and thought I would just get new pets
I understand, pets are family and we tend to love them as so, I'm glad you have them now!
I've been away from home a long time.
What do you miss about it?
My parents, of course, but I realize something else.
What's that?
I realize how much I love my pets and how much I miss them.
I can understand that.
I am going home even in this snow storm. I think I'll make it.
Are you sure it's safe ? They are predicting whiteout conditions.
I have a Suv with 4 wheel drive. I'll be fine .
Well make sure you call when you get home.
Ok I will do that .
I drove home in that freak storm earlier.
Wow, that was dangerous.
It was pretty bad out and the roads were a mess.
I can't believe you drove in that.
I made it safely.
I'm so glad you did.
I'm used to rain. I'm still driving.
This is a storm though. Are you sure?
Yeah I'm sure. Uber rides cost money.
Okay then. I'll be praying for you.
I saw my family after a year and finally apologized to them for being a bad person.
When did you go see them?
I went over the weekend down to my hometown, it was awkward at first but they really missed me.
You have changed so much as a person that you deserve to be forgiven.
I was horrible to you and my whole family for years, I am surprised they forgave me at all.
People like you who take the time and effort to change deserve to be forgiven.
I can't believe I have finally spoken to my family after all these years
what did you do that made you stop talking to them?
I did lots of bad things, drugs, stealing...
how did they react to you coming around again
surprisingly they were pretty nice and open
I bet you were relieved!
We have to pass this bill, it is best for our people.
I strongly disagree, this is a partisan bill with no clear standing.
It is about time that this country did something more active for its people.
It was hardly even voted for in the state senate, you should not push this one through.
I typically do not do this, but I will reserve my right to do so as governor.
That is all fine and well, just remember that I advised against it.
I heard the Chinese are invading.
Have you been listening to that podcast again?
Yes and they say it is true.
That will never happen so don't worry.
I just want to hide in my room and listen to the Cure.
That is a good band, I like In between Days a lot.
When I first started ghost hunting, I was scared of everything.
How did you overcome yours fears.
Just going into the houses at night and seeing if you are afraid it gives power to what you afraid of.
You are really brave person to face your fears.
I took language lessons online.
That seems to work for some people.
I learned German on YouTube.
Are you ready to go to Berlin?
I am able to speak German fluently now.
That's impressive.
Hi buddy how have you been?
I've been good just working a lot. What have you been doing?
I recently learned how to speak German on YouTube.
That's awesome, can you speak a lot of German?
Yes, I can speak the language fluently now.
It is really cool that you are bilingual now.
I must really be dumb. I never heard of these words before.
Those crosswords are tough but they can help you develop a healthy vocabulary.
But I just want to have fun doing puzzle not be a snob.
I do hate when people use fancy words in a conversation at a bar. You know they have been doing crosswords.
Screw this. Where's the Sudoku book?
But you hate math problems too.
I hate this.
What?
I've been trying all day with this thing.
What thing?
I can't get this crossword puzzle.
Don't feel bad, they make them challenging on purpose.
I am trying to work with this.
Is that a crossword puzzle?
Yes, I can't solve this one.
That's a tough one, Carson.
This is so frustrating.
Let me help you with that.
My Friend gave me a lot of money!
What do you intend to buy with them?
Nothing for now I have put a lot of the money into the bank.
Good!
I will have to use this money later.
I'm putting away as much as possible in the bank. I want to be able to use it in an emergency or for vacation.
Did you get a good interest rate? I didn't think any existed.
They don't really but my financial advisor put it in a money market and some other investments.
Won't that take a while to make you extra?
I really just want to keep it saved so I don't spend it. I want to do a lot of traveling so I have time.
Oh, that's a great plan if you are thinking of seeing many places at once.
I don't think I've ever put so much money into the bank before.
That's what banks are for, right?
I'm planning to use the money later. This is just for safe keeping.
You better hope nobody got a hold of your bank card information, or you could use your money before you even get to spend it!
I am better off leaving all my money in the bank
That is a great idea since its safer there than anywhere else
Yes, it was a lot of money as well
It's better to be safe than sorry, right?
I think you are correct
Now you don't have to worry about it.
I can't believe I forgot to set my alarm.
Make a reminder to set your alarm or set it up on your phone for the whole week.
I almost got fired over it today.
What did you tell your employer?
I told them I wasn't feeling well, but I came in anyway. I have been exhausted lately.
Maybe you should find another job.
I can't believe I am so late this morning.
What happened to you, you are never late.
I was so tired last night, I forgot to set my alarm.
Well, it Is the best of us. There's always a first time.
I guess I'm getting old and forgetful.
No, you are just stressed
Oh my God! I made it really late today at the office!
Yeah, I saw you arriving late, what happened?
Last night I was watching a movie, so I forget to set my alarm and ended up waking up too late!
I know how you feel, that happened to me a couple times and is soooo stressful.
Yep, but tonight I will make sure I set my alarm before bed!
Yeah, see you here tomorrow morning!
How do you like my new toy?
Isn't that actually Casey's?
Yeah, but he saw me playing with it the other day.
He didn't get mad?
No. He saw how much I liked playing with his favorite toy that he let me keep it.
Wow. If he saw how much I liked playing with his video games, do you think he'd let me keep it?
I really like this remote control car.
It looks like a good toy.
It's so much fun.
I think Ash also had one, although he doesn't play with it anymore.
This is Ash's car, he gave it to me since he saw I love it so much.
Well, nice of him to giver it to you to take home.
It was nice of Casey to give me his favorite toy.
That was so nice of him.
He knew how I wanted to have it.
He is such a kind person and a good friend.
I will never find one like him.
He is a jewel.
I miss living in our home town.
I thought you loved living in the city.
I do most of the time, but today while exploring a new way home I wandering into a strange neighborhood.
Was it dangerous?
No, just the roads weren't in a grid or numbered.  I got lost trying to get back home and had to used my gps to figure out where I was.
Well, it sounds like it was more of an adventure then you would have walking around your home town.
You won't believe how many twists and turns were in that neighborhood.
I've been lost before and it is no fun.
Besides the streets all the houses looked the same too.
Wow. And you said it took you an hour to get our of the neighborhood?
It seemed a lot longer but yeah, it took at least an hour.
How did you finally get out?
I was just following the map.  I must have taken a wrong turn.  I got lost on the way home.
Well, you found your way home eventually, right?
I did.  I had to call my sister and asked her to pick me up.  I gave her the address of the house I was standing in front of.
Good thing she bailed you out.
She's a good sister.  I can always depend on her.
That's great to have someone you can trust like that.
I gave Cameron some advice.  He followed them and had a successful interview.
Did he get the job?
He thinks he nailed it.  He said he got some great feedback right then.
That's great.  He's can save up for his new apartment.
He's been wanting to move out of his parent's house for a long time now.
Once he makes some money, he can.
Have you heard from Cameron about his interview?
I heard it was a success! And also thanks to your advice
I told you. He just needed to be confident.
I know! I can't believe he made it.
When does Cameron start working on that new job?
In two weeks. Thanks to you.
I stayed over at Lee's for the first time, but couldn't sleep well.
I can't sleep long at new locations either.
I got up early and made breakfast for Lee in bed.
That's usually done for married couples.
Yeah, but I was feeling grateful.
I hope Lee doesn't take it the wrong way.
I had such a great night last night!
I'm happy to hear it! What happened?
I stayed the night at Lee's house and it was such a good time
That's awesome news! I'm glad it went well
Yeah, I even decided to make him breakfast in bed
Wow he really must be special then
I had a great time with Lee the other night.
Did you stay the night at his place?
Yes, but I left in the morning for work.
Did you eat breakfast before you left?
I woke up early and made Lee pancakes and served him in bed.
What a nice treat, I bet he'll want you to stay over more often.
Hey so I'm up so early right now but Lee is still sleeping.
Yeah I think we can surprise her and make her some breakfast in bed.
Let's start with some bacon and eggs.
Good idea, I'll bake some of the croissants too.
I think Lee will be pleasantly surprised with our breakfast idea.
Yes, and she'll have us for many more sleepovers too.
There wasn't much that I like to eat at dinner so I just ate the fried chicken.
Did you mom cook the fried chicken?
She did.  It had the crispy skin that I love.
Your mom makes the best fried chicken.  I had that time I slept over at your house.
She's a great cook.  You can come over again this weekend if you want.  We are having a BBQ.
I would love to.
I thought there would be more of a selection here tonight, I am a little disappointed
I am going to try the Salmon, try it, it looks good
I don't like Salmon or any kind of fish really, I see a lot of fish here
What about the salad, it has lot's of vegetables in it
No, I don't like vegetables, I'll just have the fried chicken
Oh the chicken is good, I had that the last time
I'm not seeing much that I like at this dinner.
What kind of food are you looking for?
I don't know, maybe some chicken?
There's some fried chicken over there.
Oh, that looks alright, thanks.
Yeah no problem.
I asked Allison to marry me last night and she said yes?
How did you ask her?
I took her to the waterfall that I met her at and had the ring waiting in a fake rock under the water.
Well if you had not asked, you never would have gotten a yes from her. Happy for you man!
The country looks tiresome.
Yeah, it's everywhere.
I've been pushing to get a job but all to no avail.
Don't worry, God will provide.
I don't care anymore, am ready to give up.
That's not a real option you are gonna do tho.
I think we should have a Harry Potter movie marathon.
But you said you wanted to have a Lord of the Rings movie marathon, and we've only watched the first movie.
Yeah, but I'm bored with elves now. I want to see more magic.
I think we should finish our original plan first.
If you insist, but I still think watching Harry Potter would be more fun.
Okay, I guess watching Harry Potter is fine.
I know I didn't complete our plans earlier, but I have an idea.
Are you going to try to fix the loose ends?
Yeah, I think I have a plan that will amend everything we planned earlier to make it more current.
Sounds great, can't wait to hear it.
I know I'm a little grumpy today, but I didn't get much sleep.
Why is that?
I stayed out way too late last night.
Did you go to a party or something?
No. I just had to take care of some business.
I can make you some coffee if you want.
I shouldn't have stay out all night.  I feel terrible today.
Why did you stay out?
My friend is living town.  He has to move back home because he lost his job and can't afford his apartment.  We took him out one last time.
When is he leaving?
I think later on today.  He was already packed and everything.  I'll miss him.
You can visit him.
I went to the movies last night.
That's cool, what did you see?
I saw Big Bad Wolf, but missed the opening scenes.
That's so typical of you Ash. You always arrive late!
I know, but I can't help the type of person that I am.
Maybe you should start setting your alarms earlier.
Emotional times are among us.
Why are you packing?
I'm leaving for college this afternoon.
Oh that's right, I'm really going to miss you.
I'll miss you too! Cameron wanted me to call him when I get there.
Make sure you do, he's a good friend.
I decided to do something nice today. I gave my lunch money to a homeless man.
That was very giving of you, Sydney. How did you feel about it?
It actually felt good to be selfless about it. The smile on his face was worth it.
I bet it was. That had to feel good for your soul.
My mom told me to buy a good lunch with the $20 she gave me, but I bought some peace of mind instead.
Wow! That was so sweet of you.
Is giving money to a homeless man always a good deed?
I think it should be.
I gave away money my mom gave me for lunch.
Why should that make things complicated?
Well, I feel like I used money for purposes other than she intended.
But it was not at a personal benefit to yourself.
I was walking to school and saw this homeless guy sleeping on the bench.
That's awful.
I felt so bad for him, I had my lunch money my mom had given to me, so I gave it to him.
That was nice of you. Now he can get a meal and I will buy your lunch.
I have a book I need to give to Aubrey, is she here?
Yeah Kendall, she is in the back
Okay great, let me set my things down
Which book is it?
One of her favourite old novels by a poet
I never liked poetry but she loves it so much
I've been meaning to give Aubrey that book. That's why I took it along today.
What for? What kind of book is it?
It is a dream dictionary.  I know how she loves to interpret dreams, I'm so happy she liked it in the end.
That was so thoughtful.
I got my first pay check from the new job today and can finally pay some bills.
Were you looking a long time before getting it?
It wasn't that long but I had bills pile up so now I can start paying them off.
That feels like a relief to finally have an income.
I hate to be late on payments.
Now that you're employed, you can catch up easily.
I got my first pay check today. I'm sitting here trying to figure out what bills to pay first.
Congratulations on your first check. Hopefully, things will start looking up for you now.
Thanks. I hope so, too. It's been a bad six months and every creditor in the world is screaming at me.
I know the feeling. I had some of that myself before. Just take your time and keep in contact with them.
I learned that the hard way. I ignored some phone calls and had my utilities cut off. If I had talked to them they would have extended me.
Same thing happened to me, except it was with my phone bill. Always talk to them whether you want to or not.
I was lucky to find a job so soon after looking.
Yeah you were. Lots of people are unemployed these days. And your pay is going to be good.
Yes. So good that I'll be able to start paying some of my bills.
That will be a great feeling to be getting out of debt.
I've been praying for this time for so long.
Prayer clealry works. You are blessed.
It's not too soon to land this job. My bills are pilling up.
You got the timing right then.
I'll be putting at least my next three pay checks in paying off debt.
That's it, I have a lot of debt too.
You have your students loans, just like me.
That'll take me at least a decade to pay off.
Man I hate coming to this job every day.
I know, it is like a soul sucker.
I didn't eat this morning and I am starving.
I rarely eat in the morning, I just drink some coffee.
Do you want to grab lunch with me?
I know a great place that is close by.
I'm feeling hungry now!
Have you had anything to eat today?
No! I skipped breakfast this morning before work!
You should eat your lunch early then.
I will.
I'm starving right now. I hope I can take a break soon to eat.
Didn't you have anything today?
No, I skipped breakfast and thought I'd get some snack here but I've been too busy.
It's near time for lunch anyway. Just go early.
I think I might.
And get yourself some snacks to keep in your desk!
I just don't have the heart to leave the cat outside when it's so cold.
Yeah, I think the weather is a little too harsh, even for Mr. Whiskers.
And the nice thing is, he's been a lot more behaved lately when he's in the house.
That's good. Maybe he's happy to be out of the cold.
He doesn't even scratch the furniture that much. At least not that I've noticed.
Good for him. Nice to see he is making progress.
My cat sleeps inside the house.
Does he ever use the bathroom inside?
Only in the litter box. But he does sometimes scratch my furniture.
Is it bad? Are there lots of scratches?
I ended up buying sofa covers to cover the couches and chairs. The tables I can repaint.
You must really love that cat.
I miss my daddy!
Aww, Austin. You're too old to be crying like that.
I'm allowed to talk about my feelings! I spend all day at this new school and he leaves me here alone!
But you have us. Don't forget that!
I know but everything is so new and I'm scared!
You'll get used to it. Don't worry.
I'm feeling pretty abandoned right now.
It's okay. I'm here to comfort you.
I know, but I'm just upset that my dad dropped me off at this new school all by myself.
There are plenty of nice kids at this school I can introduce you to so you aren't as sad.
I'm sorry, I can't stop crying. I just feel so alone.
I understand that starting a new school is hard.
I got to play drums on stage last weekend, can you believe it?
No way?  What happened?
My friends and I were at that new club and the drummer didn't show up.  They were going to cancel the performance and asked if anyone could cover.
I didn't even know you played drums!
Yes, I played in high school and I'm actually not bad.  I'm not great, but I'm not terrible.  It was so much fun!
Okay, I have to hear you play sometime.
Man, that performance yesterday took me back to my high school days.
I didn't get a chance to see it but I heard you rocked out on the drums!.
Yeah, I've been covering bands on short notice and it's so much fun.
Maybe you should start working towards a music career?
I would want to, but my parents want me to study Medicine and become a doctor.
That's a shame, you'd make a great musician.
So I get a call last night, right before I'm about to get in my pyjamas.
Sounds sketchy, what happened?
Oh no, nothing like that. They were asking me to cover for them again on the drums.
I hope they paid you well, considering you were about to get into bed!
About 200 bucks, now I can pay for some new equipment.
Fair enough.
I think I might have overreacted the other day.
What happened?
I was visiting my parents and they got a new cat.
Was the cat a friendly cat?
I was trying to pet it and it scratched me. I got really mad and my mother acted protective towards the cat.
I know that you would never hurt an animal.
Look, I was riding my bike through the path and now I have a huge scratch on my arm!
The scratch looks tiny from here.
Oh not you as well! I had to take this attitude from my parents all morning.
I don't think it looks that serious, it's barely bleeding.
I think we should go to the hospital, what if I need stitches or it gets infected?
Don't be silly, I can barely see that scratch! Your parents were right.
I helped Taylor get through the video game earlier today.
You're a lot better at video games than Taylor is, so that was nice of you.
I had to walk him through getting past the secret board because he couldn't figure it out.
To be fair to Taylor, he hasn't been playing video games for nearly as long as you have.
Yeah, I don't expect him to be as good as I am.
I love staying in touch with my family. I think it strengthens the bond we have.
How do you prefer to communicate with them?
I just wrote them a letter. I can't wait to hear from them.
I find letters such an endearing and personal method of communication.
I agree. That is why I prefer them to other methods
I just came back from the ER.
What happened to your nose?
I was playing a game of ice hockey with Tracy. But during the game, Tracey recklessly swung her stick and broke my nose.
Ouch. Did it hurt?
It did before they gave me all type of pain medications.
I think I'm going to think twice before playing ice hockey with Tracey then.
I went to a fight the other night, and a hockey game broke out.
I guess this explains the broken nose.
Yeah. Tracy again with her dirty tricks.
Perhaps its time to counterpunch.
I've been running on empty for the past week.  I only drink water.
Why are you doing that?
I was fasting so that I could focus on God.
Is food a distraction?
To me, it's more about what I am willing to sacrafice for God.
You look like you've lost ten pounds.
This fasting is really tough, I'm running on empty.
Why are you fasting?
Religious reasons, I want God to have my full attention.
I hope the pain is worth it.
I will starve myself for our lord, our God.
That's a bit extreme, don't you think Jesse?.
I am hungry, but this pain doesn't even compare to the reward.
I'm actually an atheist, I don't know what you're talking about.
You just wouldn't understand. Focusing on God is the greatest act a human could perform.
You've lost me.
I am thankful that I stopped fooling around in school. Now I'm getting straight As.
We thought that we were going to lose you.
I thought that I was going to lose myself too.
You have come so far in the last 2 years.
I still have a long way to go before I get into college.
I am so proud of you.
I haven't seen you in a while, did you decide to stay with the Northern team?
Yes. I value loyalty.
This is not about loyalty, but advancing your soccer career.
I see you went for glory rather than honor.
I chose to move to the other side permanently because it was meant to be.
I understand that. I hope you respect my decision too.
I was worried someone would think I cut in the line.
Why did you step out of line anyway?
I wanted to get some water. I was really thirsty.
And you were able to get back into your place in line without any trouble?
Yeah, I got lucky. Everybody was cool about it and nobody accused me of cutting.
Something ugly happened to me yesterday.
What was that?
I was standing in line for hours for concert tickets, got thirsty, so I left the line to get a drink.
Ok, so what's the ugly part?
When I got back, they wouldn't let me back in line.  It was practically a fist fight before I convinced them to let me back in.
Yikes!  I guess they thought you were cutting.  Apparently you're not too memorable.
The line was way too long.
I know those tickets have been all you've talked about for the last month, but doesn't sound like it was worth the wait.
It's cool, I got some water and then managed to get back in the same place in line.
Did you almost pass out from dehydration?.
Yeah, but after I got the water I pushed through and got the tickets.
Well done.
These rules here that I have declared have been deemed silly and useless.
Why, what makes you come to that conclusion?
I have had enough of these arbitrary rules which are against all that I stand for.
Oh, I understand your frustration but the council agreed to these rules and you were there as well.
Yes, but after enacting some of these rules, it is clear that they do not help the citizens of this city.
I do believe we are up for a referendum on this in the upcoming election.
I declared new rules unto them.
What rules have you made now?
If you've lost every round but you win the last round of the game, you're instantly the winner.
That seems incredibly stupid and unneccesary
That's what you think.
And everyone else, once they hear this.
If they are to stay with me, they have to obey the rules.
Lay down the rules then.
They have to be home before 5 o'clock in the evening.
That is crazy. And why is that necessary?
I just want the doors locked by that time.
I don't think they can live with you then.
I made up a new board game last night and I tried to get my wife and kids to play it with me but they didn't want to play after a minute.
Really? Why not? I love board games, I wish you had asked me to come over and play.
Well, I thought it was going to be such a fun time, but my wife said that there were too many rules.
That sucks!  I bet your kids would have loved it, though.
No, my daughter said we didn't need so many rules and my son said the rules were stupid, and the game was stupid, and that I, too, was stupid.
Wow, your family sounds like a bunch of jerks.
I just declared the rules to everybody.
Yes, but that rules are stupid, and you are the only one that cares about it.
You have to follow the rules besides what you think.
That rules are just not right.
Rules are rules, so they must follow them.
They won't and you know it.
I had a chat with Sasha about the news.
What was the occasion?
I brought food to her while we were waiting in line.
Was there any specific news event you talked about?
We talked about the Raptors in the NBA Finals.
Do you think they will win?
I brought food to Sasha while we were working.
What did you bring?
It doesn't matter, what matters is we talked about the news and I realized I might love her.
You've known Sasha for like two weeks. She's an intern.
So? We had the exact same opinions on American politics and sports.
Jordan why don't you just take your time to get to know her?
I had a really nice conversation with Sasha today. It was nice to get a chance to chat.
How's she doing, anyway?
She's doing really well. We didn't talk much about personal stuff...just about the latest news.
She's such a nice person. She's probably really bugged about what's going on today.
She is. She's become very active in politics.
I ordered food from Sasha's restaurant but I never got the delivery for my party.
Seriously? I always thought her service was reliable.
I did as well, but apparently she mixed up the orders and forgot ours completely.
So are you getting a full refund then?
Yeah, and she is giving us a coupon for $100 if we order from her again which I guess is nice.
You better take advantage of a free $100 worth of food then.
I order a bunch of food from Sasha's catering service for the meeting today, and she never showed up!
Really? That's not a good way to run a business.
Yeah, she claimed I ordered the food for tomorrow, but I know I told her it was today.
Man, that sounds like an honest mistake. I hope you guys can reconcile this.
She refunded my money, but my reputation at work is pretty tarnished. I don't know if I can forgive her just yet.
Hopefully your boss will understand the mix up. That's really tough, man.
I paid her to cater our party and she didn't deliver any of our order!
I think Sasha had a family emergency.
Be that as it may, someone still should have contacted us so that we could have gone with another caterer.
Come on Alex, try to not be selfish and put yourself in her shoes.
I suppose that's understandable, and as such, I won't report her to the Better Business Bureau.
Chill out dude.
I had to kick Jan out of my house last night.
What got you so mad that you kicked her out of the house?
She kept bugging the dog and bothering him.
She is only 8 years old, you need to teach her boundaries, when she comes to visit.
Jan kept teasing the dog, it was really getting to me.
I don't think she's the best with animals. She's always winding them up.
Must hate them or something, I don't understand. I had to kick her out in the end.
Is your dog really old too?
Yeah, he's getting on a bit, which is why he's less playful these days and needs his space.
I wanna come give him a visit sometime soon.
The kids didn't know how to read yet so I read the newspaper out loud to them.
Did they listen?
They were as attentive as they could be. They are all very young still.
Young kids get restless.  They have short attention spans.
They can only pay attention to something for like five minutes.
You have it tough.
So today in class I tried reading the newspaper to the kids for the first time.
How did that end up?
They hated it, within five minutes we were back reading kid stories.
I can't imagine a five year old has much interest in US politics.
True, but you have to ease them into understanding world issues one way or another.
Next time make a story out of it.
Instead of reading them a story, the kids wanted me to read them the newspaper last night.
You probably bored them to sleep then!
I can confirm not a lot of attention was paid.
They were just curious as to why adults read them, instead of fairytales.
At least they know now, can they not read?
Not yet.
I decided to read the newspaper out loud today, over breakfast.
Did the kids appreciate all the talk about the global recession?
I think they were more focused on videogames rather than our fiscal deficit.
Maybe they're too young to hear that kind of stuff, they can't even read!
You're damn right.
Knew it.
I've been reading the newspaper to the illiterate kids.
That's nice. What are you reading about?
I'm just reading the opinion section.
Oh, that seems boring.
I hope this green dye isn't permanent. I colored my hair for St. Patrick's Day.
You dyed your whole head of hair green?
Yes and it's pretty shocking but I am Irish and going to the parade this year.
I think you'll fit right in. Besides, those dyes are not meant to be permanent.
I hope you're right but it still will be worth it for the parade.
I can't wait to see pictures once you go.
My partner is hard on me sometimes.
What did she say?
She said my beard looked gross.
I've never seen you with facial hair. I actually quite like it.
It looks fine. I love it.
Are you going to shave it off for her?
I don't care what she says, I love my beard.
You look different, it's cool to have a different style every now and then.
I think it looks good on me.
You really shouldn't listen to her.
I am going to make it no shave November, all year long.
Good lad.
My partner is so insecure, you have no idea.
Oh trust me, I know. They're great, but they ARE quite insecure.
Hah, well, here's the latest example of it. I got a nice beard, right? But she think it's awful and gross.
That makes no sense. Why would they say that?
Because she knows I look good and doesn't want anyone to pay me too much attention.
She's clearly in denial then.
I disagreed with Kendall's request, but I made the changes anyways.
What changes?
Kendall wanted me to change the document for the hundredth time.  She kept changing her mind.
That's annoying.
She's my manager unfortunately. However, it did work out well at least.
I can't stand managers who can't make up their minds.
Hey have you seen Jan?
No, I haven't seen her Addison.
I think she's been looking for me but my phone has run out of charge so I haven't been able to reach her.
No, I haven't heard from her all day and she hasn't called.
Where is Jan?
She said she couldn't find you so she went over to your friend's house instead to play video games.
It was the scariest movie I had ever seen!
It is pretty spooky! But I find movies about masked serial chainsaw murderers scarier!
I was so tense, I was about to rip the arms off of the chair!
I'm surprised you made it through the whole way!
I didn't know if I could take much more, at one point.
Next time maybe watch a rom-com or something.
I won't be going to the movies again for while.
Why, what happened?
I went to see a scary movie with Mark and I spent the whole time clinging to my chair in fear or covering my eyes with my hands.
It was really that scary? I don't think I've ever been that scared by a movie.
It was The Exorcist, Nightmare on Elm Street, and The Witch combined.
What is the name of the movie? I want to see it.
Last night, I went to watch a scary movie at the theatre at the mall.
I thought you don't like scary movies.
I still don't.  I sat on the edge of my seat the whole time, clinging tightly to the chair in front of me.
Was there anyone sitting in front of you?
Good thing it was an empty seat.  Otherwise, I would have been so annoying for someone else.
At least you sat through a scary movie now.  Last time we went, you left the movie after half an hour.
The movie is so scary, I dont know why no one warned me.
Oh calm down, get back in there and finish the movie!
I can't!
Damn Kai, you look so shook. Let's go to the mall and forget about it.
Good idea.
I was trying to get us all to make s'mores for everyone.
After adding the fuel to the fire, you should be halfway there.
I did, and it was so powerful we had to let it calm down for a bit. We didn't want to burn the marshmallows!
Was it a success in the end?
Yeah, they were delicious.
Well, you should have invited me too.
Man it took forever to toast the marshmallows.
Maybe the fire wasn't hot enough.
I added fuel to try to get it hotter, everyone was getting impatient.
Well, they could at least be grateful for trying.
I know right, I was trying all night. But I got there in the end.
Good job, Ash.
I had a wrestling match against Ash today.
Was it uncomfortable? I know you guys are always butting heads.
Of course, he had me pinned and gave me such a dirty look!
Well, you aren't ever very nice to him either.
I know, but it wasn't like I wanted to be matched with him. He's just in my bracket.
At least it's over and you guys can go to your separate corners again.
I don't know what that look that Ash gave me was about, while pinning me down.
I guess that was about intimidation.
He didn't intimidate me and didn't need to give me that look.
Y'all are friends. You should ask him why he looked at you like that.
I may ask when I see him again. No need for competitors to act that way.
And it's kind of childish to give you a look like that.
I beat Ash in wrestling the other night.
Knocked him down to the ground?
Yup. He gave me the eye while I was pinned down, but his psychological games don't work on me.
Oh, man. He must have been pissed!
He was. I busted his winning streak!
Oh, wow. Your coach must be really happy!
I broke down my car at the parking lot yesterday. I'm not sure what happen but I know I needed to get it to the shop.
Do you know what happened to the car?
No, but I know that it was broken down.
That sucks, I know how car troubles can be an issue sometimes.
Yeah, tell me about it.
Yesterday was the longest day.
Why do you say that?
After a long day at work, I couldn't get my car to start in the parking lot.
Your brand new car?
I know. I was so aggravated. I had it towed to the shop.
Well I guess anything can have mechanical problems
Quinn really needs to get a new phone.
Why do you say that?
Because he sent me a picture of the painting, but the quality wasn't that clear on the picture.
So he needs a new phone with a better camera?
He just needs a new phone in general. When I asked him to describe the painting, his phone kept cutting off.
I guess that's what he can use the money for, after he sells you the painting.
Seriously, if Austin wants me to buy this painting, he's going to have to do much better.
How do you mean?
I really liked it, but I'm not sure I understand it yet. The picture he sent was awful.
Could always ask for a description?
Yeah I did in the end, but I'm still unsure.
Ten grand is a lot for a painting, give it some thought.
So Austin gave me a pretty good description.
Is it the painting with the flowers?
Yes, the yellow flowers in the courtyard.
That's a nice piece. Very pretty.
Yes, it's quite elegant. Austin loves it.
He's always had good taste.
Hey, what's up?
Nothing much, you?
I had not been feeling well all day.
Oh, are you at work?
No, I left early.
Okay, take rest then.
I don't feel well right now.
Good thing you left work.
Okay, we need to focus on other things right now.
Ok, how about I make you a soup?
Okay, that works.
Two more hours and you will be good.
I took my kid Aubrey to the park earlier today so she could get out of the house and exercise.
That is good, where did you guys go?
We went to the park downtown with the really big jungle gym and double slide.
Did she play well with the other kids there?
Yeah, she loves other kids and playing in general, she just needs to work on her manners.
Yeah, I have noticed she gets kind of impatient trying to share with other kids.
It's really warm outside today, in case you wondered.
Is it? I've been at my desk. What have you been up to?
The kids and I picked up Aubrey and we all headed over to the park for a few hours.
That sounds like fun. Was there a special event going on?
No, the kids were all just acting crazy so we thought they could use some exercise.
Good plan for sure. I know I feel like I should just get myself a treadmill some days.
The kids have been cooped up in the house since this pandemic and needed to be out and about. So me and Aubrey went out for a jog.
I had to do the same with mine, because they're just getting used to being couch potatoes.
Kids are getting out of control these days.
Where did you find a park open with kids can play?
There's one downtown that kids go to all the time.
I have to check that one out.
Bailey was asking me all these questions about ISAs and interest rates, I had no idea.
Why would he ask you?
Well, I'm not sure. But thankfully my friend is a banker and he went into depth and all those questions.
Good stuff, so you just turned him to him?
Pretty much.
Maybe he could make you rich one day.
Guess who I saw at the bank today, Bailey!
I haven't seen Bailey for a long time.
I haven't either. Anyway, he came in because he had a question about his account but I couldn't help him.
So what did you do?
I referred him to the person who deals with his issue. I wanted to talk to him but I was in a meeting when he left.
That's too bad. It would have been nice to know what he's up to.
He's had the bank account for years and Bailey finally noticed the fees.
You hadn't noticed them before?
Nope. The banker I referred him to said most people don't questions those fees.
Well they add up. Good thing Bailey recognized the error.
Exactly. Can you imagine how much the bank collects yearly.
I suppose you should look out too from now on.
I went to visit my parents and brother.
Did you bring gifts for them?
I did give them the gift that keeps on giving, a prank.
That is very mean of you. You could scare them to death!
Hey man, I think I will play a prank on our parents.
What did you have in mind?
I will put saran wrap on the toilet seat.
Dude that is nasty.
Then I will butter the floor in the kitchen.
Don't do that they could slip and die.
It's so important that people vote.  So many people are not voting.  I've been spending the past month persuading people to go out and vote.
Elections are coming up and we need to vote if we want to see changes.
That's what I tell them.  A lot of these people think that just by protesting that's enough.
It's not.  That's just a way to voice our grievances.
We can make a difference if we all voted.
That would be astonishing.
I've been doing some volunteer work for a get out the vote group.
Really? Have you been successful?
Yeah, I've personally talked to 10 people this morning who are going to vote now.
I wonder if those people will vote they way you do.
I thought about that too, but I feel like the most important thing is getting people to the polls.
I really admire that. I hope you get a lot more people to vote.
I had frosting on my lips. It was so embarrassing.
Nobody told you it was there?
It wasn't until I put my hand on my face and came away with a handful of frosting. I had to ask the waitress for a napkin.
Well at least you noticed it before you left the restaurant. That would've been even worse
Yes, that's true
I got frosting all over my lips, and it was staining my lips.
From the cake frosting? What colour was it?
Blue, I had to ask the waitress for another napkin and she brought it straight away.
The restaurant always has such a great staff.
Yeah, she was really attentive to my needs! I'll have to go back there.
We should go together sometime!
I really enjoyed this dance class and would love to be a ballerina.
It takes more than one class to become a ballerina Robin.
I know that! But that trip to the ballet really inspired me to dance.
You can do anything you put your mind to.
That's the right attitude!
You will need a lot of lessons before you become famous.
We saw Swan Lake on a recent class trip.
Oh yeah, that was a really cool trip!
You were there?
Yes, the dancers were amazing!
Weren't they?  I signed up for a ballet class next week because it was so inspiring.
Neat!  Do they have any spaces left?  I would like to join also.
I am just coming from my dancing class.
When did you start?
I just started a week ago. I'm inspired by a recent trip to the ballet, so I intend to take a dancing class
That's cool.
Yeah, It's really dope and fun to do.
Enjoy your time there.
I met someone new today
Who's she?
As usual, I went to the park this morning, I met a stranger at the park who jogged with me.
Did you fall for her?
No, just wanted to make friends with her.
That's cool.
I always go for a walk in the park around 7am every morning and today, I met a new friend.
Do you want me to join you every morning for a walk?
Yes that will be very interesting, I can introduce you to this stranger.
By the way, maybe some time we can have lunch together.
Great that will suit me just fine.
Ok, I will keep that in mind.
It's actually nice jogging with somebody.
Yeah, it helps to make the jog interesting.
Have you been jogging here a lot?
No not really, what about you?
Yeah, I went on my usual morning walk and met a stranger.
Were they a nice person?.
Sorry I blew up a bit yesterday. I hope I didn't hurt your feelings.
It's okay. Was there something that was bothering you?
Yeah, I've been having a hard time at home lately because of my dad's diagnosis. It's been stressing me out a lot.
I thought it might be something like that. How are you feeling now?
Better. I vented in my journal and feel like a weight's been lifted. I think I just needed to get my feelings out there.
I'm glad to hear it. I'm always here for you if you need someone to listen.
I felt so much better after I wrote about my problems in my journal.
Yes, I've found that I feel better just by writing something down.
I just need to keep my journal in a place no one can see it!
I get it.  I have a sister that likes to snoop around.
Me, too.  Hopefully no one finds and reads my journal.  I was just trying to get my problems out and off my chest, and I wouldn't want what I wrote getting out.
Just keep it someplace no one would ever think to look.
I wrote about my experience in my journal.  I feel so much better now.
It always feels better to get it out however way you can.
My journal is like my best friend.  I just write in it whenever I am upset.
That's amazing you have an outlet.
Once I've written down, I feel like I can move on.
It's good to be able to let things go.
I finally vented about how I've been through so many problems recently and wrote my feelings down in my journal.
That's great! You've been through a lot recently.
It really wasn't but I feel better now after writing all my feelings down
I'm glad you're feeling better now.
I know people think the apology is not real.
How can they think it's real when you're inflicting pain on purpose.
Bailey was reluctant to accept my apology, but then he finally did.
I mean, your words must have hurt.
Yeah, I felt awful to be honest but it's all in the past now
Just be civil from now on please.
My father went coupon crazy today at the grocery store.
He cuts coupons?
He's been really into saving money on groceries so we had to use all the special deals at the store.
Did it work to get you a lot saved?
I think it did. But now he'll really want to do it all the time!
Uh Oh. You are in for coupon-cutting weekends now!
A dad loves saving money on groceries by using coupons and what not.
That's just what dads do really.
He brought back like 5 bags full of food for only 90 bucks!
That's incredible! I want to see how he does this kind of stuff.
Tricks and trades that you learn over the years, I guess.
I'm going to start trying.
There is a person who enjoyed all the great coupons, I just don't know who to give them to.
How about you give them to a dad.
That is a good idea.
Yeah it I.s
What does he plan on buying with all those coupons?
A lot of ham.
My dad is really cheap.
Didn't he gift you a car?
I'm talking about couponing and buying the cheap groceries.
That is just so that he has money for the big purchases.
Is it an efficient use of time to coupon and look for specific items to save maybe five dollars?
I've heard that is more a habit or a hobby than about the money.
I need to stop by the post office.
Are you mailing a letter to your grandma?
No, Alex is having a birthday party next month and I'm inviting all of his friends to the party.
That's kind of you. How many people are you inviting?
I'm only inviting about 15 people.
Well, just make sure there's cake and a pinata!
I invited all of Alex's friends to his birthday party.
That's awesome! Do you think they will all come?
Well, I sent out invitations to everyone that knows Alex.
This birthday is going to be spectacular!
Absolutely! That's if everyone shows up.
I am sure that they will.
I am going to borrow my a car to drive to the job site this weekend.
Yeah your car is about 5 miles away from kicking the bucket.
It sounds awful, I just need to get a new car.
Will anyone mind us taking another car?
I do not think so, we will only be gone two days.
Okay, I just don't want anyone to be mad about it.
I can't believe we got the same construction job together.
It's a long commute, but the good pay and working and traveling together will be worth it.
The long commute is the one thing I'm worried about.  I'm not sure my car can handle it day after day.
There might be a bus, or we could rent a car, Kendall
How about I front you some cash and together we get you a car?
Well, I do need a car, but I don't know.  Maybe you could upgrade yours.
I think I can just take a train and it wont cause me any problems
I had seen one advertised yesterday and it was one hundred dollars for a round trip
That actually sounds amazing. Let's book an order
I'll set a booking up right after we eat this dinner
Sounds great to me, thanks for helping me sort this out.
Did you hear that Jan almost died from a seizure?
That's terrible, I just heard from you.
It would have ended badly hadn't I been there to save his life.
God bless you for your heroics.
Thank you. I am just so happy that he is alive.
Me too. He is such a close friend.
I read Casey's graduate thesis the other day.  I gave him my interpretation of it in order to help him improve it.
I am sure Casey appreciates the feedback.
He told me he did.  He said he didn't think of it the way I interpreted it.
It's nice to have fresh eyes on your work.
He's also in a different field than me so I raised questions that he thought were common sense.
That's true.
I feel bad that I said what I said to Casey, but I think the thesis needed it.
Why, what happened with Casey's thesis?
Well, Casey asked me to read it and say what I thought.
Oh that was nice of you.
Yeah, but I don't think Casey thought I would give that much feedback with a different interpretation.
Well, as long as it improves the thesis, I think Casey understands and will be happy.
Casey presented her graduate thesis to me.
Was it perfect?
She did her best. but after reading  the thesis I gave her a different interpretation.
That should help her.
Yes, it should improve her work.
Just so you know, Kai is in town this weekend and I offered the couch for her while she is here.
Well, you could have asked me first.
I didn't think you would mind since you are going to be out of town this weekend.
Still, I know Kai is your friend but I don't trust her after last time.
She only spilt food and drink on your bed because she drank too much Peach Schnapps and then ate Oreo cookies. I will make sure nothing like that happens again.
My grandma made that quilt and the chocolate would not come out.
Instead of staying at that dusty old hotel all weekend, how about Kai comes and stays with me?
Wouldn't he be putting you out of a room?
Gosh no! I have lots of space. I inherited the house. It's practically a mansion.
Well, if that's the case, do it.
You won't regret it. The house has a separate apartment in case you don't want to chill with us.
Sounds good to me!
All my relatives brought candy for my birthday.
That must have been a lot. You have a really big family.
It was but I brought in a ton to school and gave it away in class.
That must have made you popular for the day!
It did. I even made a special pack for the teacher to keep in a bowl on her desk.
That is really generous of you to do.
I got so much candy for my birthday.
Why did everyone give you candy?
Well, they know I have a sweet tooth.
So why did you give it away?
It's just too much and I don't want cavities.
Oh, I see. You didn't save any for me?
I had so much candy from my birthday party. So I brought a bunch to school.
I'm sure everyone was your best friend today!
Yeah, I handed it out to everyone, and still had some left to bring home.
That's generous of you.
I'm not that big into sweets, but we had a candy buffet at my party. There was no way I could eat it all!
Share the wealth! That's what I always say.
I have to stay late at work.
Why? We will miss our dinner reservations.
I know. I'm sorry. But we had a new employee start today and she has been ignoring the portion size rules and throwing good things out. I need to make sure she doesn't use all the product before the end of the day.
Why don't you just tell her to stop?
I have. Six times. And I would just fire her right now but she has only just started.
Oh, that is no good. I'll see you when you get home.
I've been keeping a close eye on our new employee. Sometimes new employees waste a lot of dough.
I guess people do make mistakes when they first start a new job.
She's is doing really well so far. I think she's got a knack for baking.
I'm glad you found a good worker. Does she want to be a professional baker?
She really seems to love it. She asked me to be her mentor.
That's a really cool thing to do for someone.
I'm hungry.
You just ate a lot of sweets.
I'm scared to ask Sasha for what I really want.
I think you want ice cream, but you've had enough sweet treats today. Anyway, stop staring at her.
I don't know what to say. Maybe a little more sweet treats will work and that's it.
Well, I'll think about it.
Early today I went for a walk without my dog and ran into a few dogs. I had some treats in my pocket so I tossed them to the dogs.
You shouldn't do that. You don't know if the dogs are treat-aggressive.
What do you mean by that?
Dogs will fight over food and treats. They have wild instincts and still think they have to compete for food.
I didn't know that, they seemed a little upset with me and wanted more thinking back to it.
Now you know, don't feed a group of dogs you don't know, it could mean trouble.
I love making the pups happy. I fed them treats I stashed in my pocket.
Those dogs are going to be so spoiled and overweight.
I take them for walks all the time so they burn it off and I'm teaching them tricks.
You are a great dog owner. Those dogs are lucky.
Hey look at that.
What is this?
I found money on the street.
Hide it before someone else claims it as theirs.
It's $20. I'm going to the burger restaurant across the street.
That sounds great. I have a taste for a juicy hamburger too.
I really got lucky finding that 20 dollar bill on the ground
You always seem to have the craziest luck sometimes.
last week I found a brand new wallet on the ground but I turned that in.
Hopefully that guy comes back for his wallet and it works out.
I'm just now finishing up the kitchen. Wiping all the crumbs off the counter.
Did you clean the kitchen alone?
I did. But there wasn't much to do.
What did you eat?
Soup and a crusty bread.
So that's where the crumbs came from.
This place really needed to be straightened up.
Well, it's not that bad, it just needed to be organized.
Good thing I was around, wiping off all the crumbs and what not.
You finished it all on your own?.
Yes, I finished wiping the crumbs from the table, what's next?
You're great Jan.
Good thing I got that kitchen out the way, now I can focus on other things.
What else is there to do?
Well I just wiped some crumbs from the table to the floor.
Now you need to sweep the floor all over again?
Not really, I just sweep up the crumbs.
You're a workaholic, aren't you?.
I cant wait to get home from school at a faster pace.
Yeah, there is for sure a quicker way to get home.
I took a shortcut by climbing a fence.
Yeah that's a good idea. It should save you a lot of time
It will. It makes my navigation a lot better
That is very true.
The shortcut works, even though I'm unfamiliar with that neighbourhood.
What kind of neighbourhood is it?
It isn't a dangerous area, but I hopped over a fence and got out of there quickly.
Did you run into any trouble at all?
Not really, just some funny looks every now and then.
Just make sure you know what you're doing.
My mom said she would have a surprise for me when I got home from school today so I rushed out there so fast when that bell rang!
Don't you walk home from school, I am sure that takes a while
It does but I found a short cut through the path, I won't do that again by the way!
Why, did you get lost?
No but I had to climb a fence and ended up getting home with ripped pants, mom wasn't happy
Did she still have a surprise for you?
It was like a scene out of Stand By Me, I just wanted to take a short cut!
What happened? I remember the movie Stand By Me, but what scene was it like?
I started walking though the short cut and heard a dog growling at me from a distance! I booked it to the nearest fence!
Ah, now I know what scene you are talking about! Did you make it over the fence without a scratch?
I luckily did! The dog chased me, but I was able to quickly climb the fence with no issues.
You are one lucky person! I never would have made it over the fence myself!
I took the short cut to get out of school quicker
I take the long way up the hill
It's better if you climb the fence, it shortens the time to get home
How big is the fence?
It's short, easy as anything to be honest
Okay I'll try it
Aubrey is a cool kid
Oh! your foster son!
Yes! I took him to the park for two hours
He had fun right?
Yes, he had a wonderful time and hugged me happily
Wow! so nice that you two get along.
My mom caught me trying to sneak food away from the table again.
Why are you sneaking food from your own house?
There's a racoon who lives in the tree outside my window. I've been feeding it.
Oh geez, you'd better not tell your mom about that. She'll have it exterminated.
I know. So tonight I tried to put a biscuit in my pocket and she caught me. She made me eat it in front of her while she watched me the whole time.
How awkward! Well I'm sure the racoon will be fine on his own.
A lot of people actually compliment me on my teaching style.
What do you teach?
I teach law at the university.
That sounds like a really hard thing to learn.
It is. But I think how I simplify it is why people love my teaching style.
Well, if I ever get in trouble with the law, I'll be sure to ask you.
I'm so glad that my students love the way I teach.
You're an amazing professor.
I try my best to make sure my students learn and are prepared for the future.
That is all you can do as the rest is up to them.
I'm just glad that they're putting in the work and seeing the efforts pay off.
I'm going to have to come sit in one of your classes.
I've been getting a lot of compliments about my teaching style.
What do you teach?
I teach law at this university.
I should stop by one of your classes one day.
You can come tomorrow at 10am.
Man it was so sad leaving Jordan, he's such a hero.
I guess that it is sad.
Perhaps we will see each other again, but for now he just wished me the best.
Where is he going again?
He's got a scholarship in California to study marine biology.
Damn, he's smart.
Man I hate being stuck inside on a nice sunny day like today.  Too bad I have to work.
Only a few more hours left and you are done with work.
Look at all of those kids playing hopscotch over there.  One of them just fell.
Is he okay?
He looks fine.
Being away from my family for this long is really driving me crazy.
Yeah these road closures are really annoying.
Yeah, it's so nice outside and the sun is shining but I can't even leave the house.
You have to try to find something constructive to do.
That's what I've been doing but it's taking a toll on me.
It's taking a toll on all of us. I'm here for you.
Man, its so nice outside.
I know, no humidity and the sun is shining.
Beats the past five days of rain.
I know right.
I've been stuck inside all this time, all I can do is appreciate it through the window.
I feel your pain, just try and get out there as soon as you can.
I was talking to Casey about the old days, me and her should go to our camping spot next weekend.
That would be really fun, were you two really close back in the day?
I miss doing stuff like that with her back when we were in high school.
Oh right, I sense a bit of romance there. Correct me if I'm wrong.
Oh no, God no, nothing like that.
If you say so.
Casey and I decided to go on a trip to the lake.
What make you guys decide that?
We were just talking about the good old days.
You guys did spend a lot of time down by the lake.
Yeah, we did a lot of fishing back then.
I bet you will bring along your tackle boxes this go round as well.
I had to go to speak to the scientist, one of them was Robin. She was telling me an absolutely crazy theory
Do you think her claims about the rain containing the radioactive particles is real?
The information that she shared with me, changed my mind. In another 50 years that rain will kill us.
Have you turned the information to the president?
I had a lot of fun at the bonfire last night. Did you see that guy I was talking to?
Oh, yeah, I did see him. Alex, right?
Yeah. I was kind of thinking of asking him out on a date...
Totally! You should! He seemed really nice.
I got his number from Remy. Should I text him right now?
Yes! I want to hear what he says! Maybe invite him out to dinner.
The yam was okay,  it was a bit sweet for me.  The potatoes were divine though. Sarah made a real effort for the party.
Sounds like you guys had great food.
It was a potluck so we all made a couple of dishes.  It was a great celebration.
What was the occasion?
It was my baby sister's graduation from high school.  We decided to have a party at the house for her.
She's all grown up now.  Is she going to start college in the fall?
Wow, these potatoes are really good. I'm glad Sarah decided to make them for our Thanksgiving dinner.
How many did you eat? The whole tray was gone after 20 minutes!
Oh, I swear it wasn't just me. People gathered around them like scavengers.
I see, did you try the yams as well?.
Yeah, compared to the potatoes they were a bit underwhelming. But still good!
I agree with you.
Sometimes people really don't get the picture. It's my job to evict you.
It's not an easy job by any stretch of the imagination, but someone's got to do it.
This guy Kendall forced me to get an edict, he just wouldn't leave.
That seems a bit extreme.
So I brought up my concerns to the workplace.
Which ones?
The ones about sustainable business practices.
Oh, how did they take it?
They were willing to listen to my concerns. They always encourage us to do so.
Oh, that's good to hear.
Today in our weekly office meeting, I finally spoke my mind about some upcoming sustainable strategies, and I was finally regarded as an equal member of the team!
Like there was ever any doubt.  You're the most important member, because you have the most revolutionary ideas of anyone else on the team.  You're the idea person for the future of the department.
You really think so?
Of course I do.  Without you, your department would just eventually wither and die, cause everyone else just rehashes the same old ideas and strategies, and those just don't cut it in today's business world.
Well, thank you, partner, I really appreciate your support.
It's not just support, Skylar. I believe in you so much, and I trust you to do what it takes to bring the company to where it belongs, in the future.
My organisation is really promoting sustainable business practices at the moment. I spoke my mind out at that meeting.
You have some great ideas and your company really encourages that.
I hope they actually do go ahead, I'm really passionate about this.
Let me know how it goes
I won't bore you with the details but yeah, sure.
Business sustainability is interesting. I won't be bored, promise.
There really are so many benefits in working in a horizontal organisation. There are no fears in sharing your ideas to your superiors.
You have a lot of stuff that you can share?
Its great that these amazing ideas come from anywhere. We have a great open expressive community built here. I'm going to share a lot more stuff on sustainable business practices.
That sounds like a fantastic place to work.
I'm going to miss this town.
You have lived here all your life.
I saw Casey today.
Was he sad about you leaving?
Yeah, he asked to take a picture, and then I gave it to him.
That's a good parting gift.
Casey asked me to take a picture with them so I gave Casey the picture. I felt like a celebrity.
How's Casey these days?
He's back in town.  He's working at a law firm.
Didn't he just graduate from law school?
This is his first job out of law school.
It's good to know a lawyer.
I had to work and therefore couldn't keep my promise.
What happened?
Well, I was going to take Sasha's mom to new burger joint for lunch. It was also her birthday so I feel twice as bad.
She's really mad at you for breaking your promise.
I'm going to have to reschedule as soon as possible.
Try and recover the situation, I guess.
Tracy rode to school with us because she missed the school bus.
Did your mom or dad drive?
My dad drove, why?
I'm just surprised that Tracy built up the nerve to ask. You know how shy she can be.
Well she needed to get to school. It was either ride with us or walk.
She made the right choice because that is too far to walk.
Tracy missed the bus again.
Her dad had to work late, and didn't get her up on time.
She asked my mom for a ride, and we took her to school.
Your mom is so sweet, and she didn't have to be late to school.
I'm so proud of myself today.
That's great to hear. What did you accomplish?
I was walking along the side of a road when I noticed a bunch of baby ducklings and a car headed towards them. It looked like the driver couldn't see them.
That sure sounds frightening.
It was. But I managed to save them, in front of my classmates as well.
That's definitely a relief. Those ducklings must have been terrified. I'm glad to know that they're safe.
As I was leaving school the other day I saw a bunch of baby ducklings.
Aw, I bet they were so cute!
They were, but a car almost hit them and I had to step in front and warn the car to stop so the ducklings could pass safely.
Wow. That was really brave of you!
I just didn't want to see the ducklings get hurt. The whole class saw me and was proud.
I am proud too. That was very awesome of you to do!
I'm exhausted after spending the afternoon in the pool.
How many laps did you swim?
I didn't swim laps, but I did throw a pool toy into the deep end and timed myself to see how quickly I could grab it.
That sounds like it would be very tiring.
Yeah, by the time I got out of the pool I felt like I'd run a marathon.
At least you got some good exercise in.
I had a really great time at the pool the other day
Oh that's awesome! I've been meaning to go
Yeah I made up a game where I just throw something and swim to it for exercise
That's a really great idea!
Yeah maybe we can go together this week?
I would really love that
I've been trying to work out more, and I heard swimming is good for your body.
It really is, because you are moving everything.
I throw a toy to the deep end and then I just jump in, swim to the bottom and collect it.
Do you think you will take classes?
Eventually, I don't know when yet.
I wanted to see how far and how fast I could get the diving toy.
That seems like fun. How fast did it take you?
I'm not too sure. I forgot to time it but I know it was within one breath.
Man, that's awesome. The more your practice the better you will get at it.
I love worship music, I listen to Sirius radio all the time!
Oh, so do I! How can I catch up with you?
It's available 24/7 so you can listen to Sirius radio station at anytime
And what made you select this Sirius radio station?
Well, it is because the station is all about faith and worship.
Hopefully I will explore something in my life that is a cult-like religion.
I love this Sirius station. I can't stop listening.
You are always listening to that channel.
It has the greatest mix of Music I've ever heard. And it's all about religion!
Well, it gets annoying for everyone else to hear every single day.
Oops, I need to use my earbuds!
Do you listen to Sirius?
No, I just listen to regular radio.
Oh, you are missing so much. Sirius is great. The variety, the sound, I could just go on and on.
Isn't it expensive?
No, not really. I think it's worth it. I know you drive a lot.
Okay I'll give it a try.
I don't know why Riley can't take a joke. He gets so annoyed.
At you especially. But admit it, you do know how to push his buttons.
They're just jokes. And get this: he's mad at me right now because I stuck my tongue out at him.
Because you stuck your tongue out at him? That's kind of ridiculous.
Isn't it? He needs to get over himself. I'm getting fed up with it.
You two should probably give your friendship a pause. Just for a while.
I'm not sure what Riley's problem is.
Is he mad today?
I don't know. I was joking around and he wasn't very happy with me.
Maybe he is having a bad day.
That's why I was trying to make him smile, but clearly I'll no best to not stick my tongue out at him.
Just wait and try again later.
Riley is really acting like a baby..
Tell me more..
All I did was stick my tongue out at her, now she won't talk to me and it's upsetting me.
You know that she's really sensitive, try and apologise to her.
I cant believe Addison thought green was a good colour.
I don't thing it was such a big deal to argue over something so small like that
Yeah, but I hate green and I just think it's a dumb colour and looks stupid
Wasn't really worth burning a bridge with Addison though was it?
I guess not, I've made a great error.
Call her as soon as possible.
I was fighting with Addison over a dinner, to the point where I'm burning a bridge with her.
That is so trivial, what is the point.
I know I apologized to her.
You burnt a bridge with her, over something so small?!
I need your help so I can make up with her .
Take her out for coffee.
I sure do miss Addison.
What happened between you two?
I just got jealous over her hanging out with another friend over me, and I ended up arguing with her about it.
I can see why you might get jealous, but I also can see why she got mad. People can have more than one friend.
I know, and that's why I can't believe I fought with her and lost my friendship over something so trivial.
Well just give it time, maybe she will come around again.
These damn thugs have been breaking in everywhere.
I heard about that women they completely robbed on 10th street.
I went yesterday and bought 2 guns, for protection.
Having a gun will make you feel more safe, if they break in you can shoot threaten them.
There have been a lot of robberies in this area. I needed added protection.
What did you do to protect your business?
I had two layers of fencing installed with barbed wire.
Wow! That must have been expensive.
We also got three well trained German shepherds. They cost more than the fencing.
I love dogs! They probably can sniff out the danger better than me and you.
I forgot Lee's dog at the park.
Why did you have Lee's dog?
I offered to play with his dog in the park but I got distracted and I forgot him.
Well, you better go back and hope you find him.
I'm on my way now.
I can't believe I just left Lee's dog at the park.
How did that happen?
I was playing with Lee's dog and promised him that I would take him back home.
Well, how did you forget?
I got a call from a friend and got distracted. I got to drive back to the park.
You better hurry before somebody takes the dog. He's friendly.
I'm going for a run!
Has it stopped raining?
Yeah, I want to keep my shoes dry.
That's a good idea, go sweat it out!
I'll be back before dinner.
Alright, see you soon.
We were cooped up all day at home.
What was the matter?
The rain continued all morning and into the afternoon.
Did the weather improve?
When the sun finally appeared I raced out of the back door and into the sunshine for a jog.
That is exactly what I would have done.
As I was taking the test, Tom and Sasha were secretly looking at their notes.
How do you know this?
I saw both of them pull out small pieces of paper from their desks.
How do you know the paper included answers to the test?
I saw them copy information from the paper for each question.
You snitched them in? What's wrong with you!
Man I just feel terrible.
What's going on?
I saw Tom and Sasha cheating on the biology exam today.
That test is tough, but cheating ruins it for the rest of the class.
Yeah, and our teacher works on the honour system, so I reported them to her after class.
Nobody wants to report on their friends, but you did the right thing, cheating is wrong.
I did not know that Alex lived near to my neighbourhood.
Yeah, he moved there like a year ago.
I wonder if he knows where I live since we stopped being friends.
He probably does not, he broke away from our friend group for a reason I think.
It is a shame because I used to really like him.
If he ever wanted to be friends again, then he would consider it.
Alex moved closer to me.
Does he live in the same community?
No, he's not in the gated area.
But it's nearby?
Yeah, it's still close to me.
You can hang out all the time now.
Did you know Alex lives near here?
No, is he in the community?
No, he lives outside the gated community on Bluebell street.
Oh, there. That area is questionable.
You don't have to be a snob about it.
It was so boring at home yesterday, so I went out with my friends!
Did you enjoy the outing?
Yes! I enjoyed the outing so I decided to pay fore their entire bills.
You did a great job!
So I picked up the tab for everyone.
That was very nice of you.
Well I insisted everyone meet up, even though there is so much going on.
I'm sure you will get some good karma from this, they got a free meal.
Exactly. What goes around comes around.
It sure does.
I went to the beach yesterday.
What did you do while you were there?
I found lots of different seashells.
Did you bring them home?
No, I left them there but I organized them all into long straight lines in the sand.
That sounds like fun!
Last weekend my parents took us to a beach house.
It must have been so nice to be at the ocean, did you go swimming.
I did, and we built sand castles, and went fishing.  I even found a bunch of seashells in the sand.
Seashells are so pretty, did you keep them?
A few, I organized them into straight lines in the sand based on type and size, I was pretending I was a marine biologist.
How much fun, I wish I had been there to play with you, I want to be a marine biologist when I grow up.
I love finding these different seashells.
I can see that!  You've found so many!  What did you do to them?
I organized them by species, size, colour, density, weight, apparent age, and other factors, then lining them up alphabetically.
Why are you going to all that trouble?
I don't know.  But I feel such a powerful compulsion to do this, and since I started already, now I can't stop, no matter what.
Dude, I think you might need to talk to a professional.  You might have OCD or something.
Look at all the seashells I found.
Why are they all in straight lines in the sand?
Each kind has its own line.
You are very organized.
They say it's a condition.
Yes, I have noticed you're incredibly neat.
Austin earned his position and I know he won't let me down.
You know other waiters who have been there longer; they're going to be angry.
I know they will. They don't have Austin's work ethic.
Well as head waiter he needs to offer a class in class.
You are so right. He could make a lot of money giving classes too.
Well I hope you don't catch a lot of flack because of this. Austin earned it.
My class has been so well behaved this year. I'm so proud of them.
That's great! After last year, you deserve a stress free class!
I know! Well, I wanted to reward them so I threw them a kind of surprise party yesterday.
Awesome! I bet they loved it!
Yes, they were so happy and excited! They all got little goodie bags and everything!
It sounds like fun! I wish I was there!
Sometimes I can be a tough parent, but the kids have been on their best behaviour lately.
Did you do something special for them?
I threw a party for them. A nice cookout with water games and stuff. We even brought over a couple of their friends!
I'm sure they needed it. Not just as a reward, but just as a reason to get out of the house!
Exactly! It was a surprise and they loved it.
Hopefully they stay well-behaved going forward!
Kendall and I practiced tennis today.
At the tennis court in your neighbourhood?
Yeah, Kendall taught me how to properly hold my racquet.
Oh, that's fun!
Yeah, Kendall is good at tennis he was teaching me how to grip the racket good.
Oh yeah? Tennis is fun. Did he put help your grip? Because I heard you were slacking.
Sure did and it was fun. Tennis is one of my favourite sports.
Mine too, can't wait to see you out in the courts.
Surprise! Do you like my new haircut?
I love it! It's so short, you chopped a lot off!
I did, 8 inches off! It's just so hot here in the summertime and I was tired of having hair on my neck, so I chopped it short.
Did you cut it off yourself?
No way! I went to a salon and had it done.
I thought so, it looks really good!
Ugh, I was so sick of this hair on the back of my neck.
Did you go to that salon I recommended you?
Sure did! I decided to get my hair cut short.
I think that it looks great!
Thanks so much friend!
This hair was becoming a real problem, it kept getting in my food and it's just way too hot to have it that way.
It was all the way at the back of your neck.
I got it cut short, feels kind of strange.
Doesn't feel right looking at you with short hair.
It doesn't feel right looking at the mirror either, but it feels amazing.
I will miss you mullet.
I had my fifth guitar lesson this afternoon. I'm starting to get the hang of it.
How did you afford a new guitar?
I didn't have to buy it. I won it in a sweepstakes at the grocery store.
You're so lucky! I never win anything.
I have to say, I do feel pretty lucky. I've always loved music.
Me too. Bring your guitar next time I see you and play a song for me.
I'm so stoked about winning a guitar.
Where did you win a guitar?
The local supermarket had a sweepstakes.
You're really lucky to win, are you going to learn to play?
Of course, I signed up for lessons.
That's smart of you.
I was at the grocery store last month buying milk and I entered a sweepstakes and won.
That's cool! What did you win?
A guitar. Which I couldn't play. So I took guitar lessons.
Is playing guitar something you were interested in before winning?
I thought it looked cool, but not really. But I really enjoy it now.
And you will have a new skill.
Robin was so concentrated on his cooking this morning.
What was he cooking?
It was breakfast. I slowly snuck into him to scare him.
Did you scare him?
Yes I did. I guess I screamed so loudly on his ear.
Poor Robin.
I tiptoed and booed you and you got mad.
Yeah because I was cooking.
Yea but you did that to me.
Not around fire.
Sorry bro.
Just don't let it happen again.
Ha, you should have seen what happened with me and Robin today!
What happened? Didn't you have a lunch date at his place?
Sure did! He cooked a great meal!
I'll bet! He's an awesome cook!
Well, while he was concentrating on measuring an ingredient, I snuck up behind him and yelled BOO! He jumped a mile!
Oh, you're such a joker!
Well, Matt and Tom are being real jerks again.
Matt I can believe, but Tom too?  What happened?
Well, I let it slip that Peggy-Sue has a crush on Carl.  So, when Matt and Tom heard the news, they ran off and told Carl.
So what's the problem? Matt and Tom were just playing like Cupid.
First of all, Peggy-Sue told me never to tell anyone. So I am so busted, but those jerks spray-painted Peggy-Sue Love Carl all over outside of the math class windows.  So Peggy-Sue and Carl, who were sitting next to each other in the front row of Math class today, found out when Mr. Beevers raised the blinds 5 minutes into class.  Imagine, being forced to sit in embarrassment for 40 minutes while Mr Beevers refers to the graffiti all period.  Peggy-Sue is going to kill me!
Look on the bright side, the windows in that class are finally gonna get a good washing...
Hey do you know about how Halley failed her college entrance exam?
Yeah, I know she wanted to keep it a secret from people.
Well, I accidentally let it slip to Matt and Tom.
Oh, no, you know they have big mouths and everyone will know.
I'm feeling pretty bad about letting it slip.
Don't worry, Halley is going to have to let everyone know at some point.
I kinda sorta had another outburst at school today.
You gotta stop doing that, Skylar! What did you do this time?
Well...Kai and some of her buddies made a really nice toy city out of blocks...and I may have smashed my matchbox car into all of the buildings...
You're lucky that you weren't suspended for that!
I know...they were all crying, and I started crying too. I need to be a better classmate.
Yeah, you need to work on that. Gotta think about their feelings too.
Kai, I will never speak to you again. You really made me so angry.
Skylar, it was an accident, really.
We spent hours building this model city just to have it
You can put together its easy.
But its a lot of work. You did it on purpose.
No I did not. My car has a mind of its own so blame it on the car not me.
I had to manually fix my car.
Why? Why don't you just send the car in?
I don't have the money at the moment.
I understand. Everyone's struggling nowadays.
Hey, I'm getting ready to pull into the driveway right now so if your car is parked there, I need you to move it.
Why? There is enough room in the driveway for both of our cars and then some.
I need the entire driveway because today is my only day off work and I need to fix my car while I have the time.
Well why didn't you just say that in the first place? I'll go outside and move my car onto the street right now until you are finished fixing your car.
Okay, thanks! I really appreciate it. If you want you can just leave your keys in your car and I'll pull your car back into the driveway once I'm finished fixing my car.
Okay, that sounds good. If you need any help, let me know.
My car is making a weird noise, so I'm going to pull into the driveway so Mark can work on it.
What kind of noise is it making?
It sounds kind of like something is stuck in the fan belt or something.
Let me look under the hood right quick.
Do you see anything that looks like it is a problem.
Uh, yeah...there's a dead cat stuck in your fanbelt.  Get rid of the cat and that noise should stop.
I wondered around looking for something to do.
What did you end up finding?
I heard the zoo was worth the trip so I headed there.
Did the advice pay off?
Yes, the zoo was very nice and the animals were awesome.
That's good, maybe I will check that out.
I visited some tourist destinations last Monday.
Where did you go?
I saw some things downtown.
Did you go anywhere of note?
I went to the zoo in the afternoon.
That must have been fun. I love seeing animals.
I've been so upset about this skin problem of mine.
I'm sure it's distressing, but you're in good hands with your doctor.
True, true. And I finish my treatment tomorrow.
Oh good. Where did he end up sending you to get it done?
Just a local clinic. They're doing a good job.
Well, he's a good doctor, as you've said.
Well I just think that it is to expensive.
It is a fair price for the space.
I know but the location isn't that good.
You don't want to lose this space.
Ok, I will agree to the contract.
Those views are so amazing.
There is a lot of stuff that happen in this calculation
Oh there most defientely is
I think one thing that is important is that we correct our mistakes overall
yeah that is true.  Especially when going into math
I am really glad we are working on this problem together
So am I
I'm so thankful to my dog!
Why, did your dog eat your homework for you so you don't have to do it?
No, I lost my car keys but my dog sniffed them out unexpectedly from behind the couch.
Wow, your dog must have a great sense of smell.
I know! I rewarded him with a treat.
The treat is well-deserved.
My dog found my car keys for me!
Did you train it to do that?
No. She saw me searching on the floor and I guess she smelled the leather keychain so she grabbed them.
that's too cool.
I gave her treats and hugs and stuff.
I hope you can train her to do that often.
I can't find the car keys and I have to go soon.
Did you look in the couch cushions?
They are not in the couch.
The dog jumped off the chair and they fell to the floor.
The dog is good boy.
I think she needs a treat.
My dog, Bambi, found my car keys today.  I was so grateful I gave her two treats.
Bambi is a good dog.  She should come over and help me find things.
It's like she knew I was looking for them.  I turned around and she had my keys in her mouth.
Was she wagging her tail?
She was.  She does that when she wants a treat.
She deserves a treat.
I can't find my keys anywhere!
Taylor, look! Your dog has them!
Oh my god, how did she do that?
I have no idea!
I better give her a treat for doing such a great job!
I was so happy that all my training paid off.
Did you win against someone who would normally have beat you?
Yeah, my brother. We've wrestled about 10 times and this was my first time beating him.
You've really put in the work and you've been gaining strength.
It paid off today.
How did your brother take it?
i feel really good putting in time to volunteer for you kids at the youth center
do they ever give you anything for volunteering for them?
i won a trip to paris about four years ago and they usually give us someone inreturn for helping out
that seems like agreat deal and you get to help the kids out
its all worth it in the end
I volunteer.
Yea the kids really love this.
It's all about giving it back.
haha happy b day.
You are a great fan of life.
Yea go jets!
I'm so bored right now.
You don't have anything to do?
Ash said he was coming over soon.
What are you planning to do?
He said he's bringing a nintendo switch over to play together.
The switch is a lot of fun.
This stay-at-home order was really getting to me. I was super bored today.
What did you end up doing to cure the boredom?
Ask showed up unexpectedly and brought a Nintendo switch.
I have never seen one of those. Was it fun?
It was so much fun. It helped pass the time and cure the boredom.
Ash always knows just the right thing.
I was so bored so I went to Ash's to play Switch.
Did you have fun ?
Yeah, I was not bored anymore.
That switch sucks up all time.
I really messed up Casey's arm at the wood-shop.
What did you do to Casey?
I was in a rush and I was using the circular saw. Debris went flying and it cut up Casey's arm.
Is Casey okay?
He's at the hospital getting stitched and bandaged up. He's very mad at me.
Make sure you pay his hospital bill since it was your fault. Give someone a warning next time.
I accidentally hurt Casey in the wood shop today.
Oh no, is she alright? What happened?!
I was sawing a wooden plank, perhaps too quickly, and a piece of wood flew and hit her in the arm.
I hope she wasn’t hurt too bad.
No, she was ok. But I still feel bad about it.
It was a mistake. Stuff happens in life that we don’t see coming. Im sure she doesn’t blame you.
You won't believe what I did today. I was in the shop sawing wood and hit a nail that was still in the wood.
What happened. You didn't get hurt, did you?
No, but I was in a hurry and didn't see the nail. It made some wood fly around and it hit Casey.
Is Casey alright? It didn't hit him in the eyes or anything, did it?
No, luckily, it just hit him in arm but I still feel terrible. He got big cut on it. I cleaned it up put some bandages on it.
As long as there's no wood left in the cut, I'm sure he'll be fine.
I really feel the students I'm mentoring are starting to make changes in their lives.
That's really great to hear.
Volunteering to mentor has been one of the best decisions I'v made.
I think it takes a special person to do what you're doing.
I don't think I'm special. But I do feel good that I'm playing a role in shaping the lives of struggling students.
You're actually inspiring me to maybe volunteer.
I love mentoring the struggling students!
Why do you mentor them?
It makes me feel good knowing being the role model.
That does have to give you a sense of comfort.
It does I wouldn't want to do anything else.
I'm sure they really look up to you!
i just havnt been feeling too good after taking that shot of liquor
i have a loaf of banana bread here if you want to use it
i think this could absorb some of the alcohol
take as much as you need to and drink some water too
Jan is so crazy, she made all of us do shots this weekend.
Oh man, she does have crazy parties.
Yeah I took the last one and got in my head that the only thing that would make me feel better is to bake banana bread.
Thats... an interesting way to feel better.
Yeah it didn't really make me feel better and I was drunk, so it didn't really turn out haha.
Oh no!  Are you going to bake more today?
I like my new trash compactor.
Did you install it yourself?
Yes, I watched YouTube videos.
Let me see how it works.
You just put the trash in this hole and turn it on. See?
Geez, trash went shooting everywhere. Look at your walls! Next time hire a professional.
My new trash compactor is really effective.
That's nice. Does it help you save money on garbage pickup?
Yeah, I can fit twice as much trash in my trash can now.
Can I watch you compact some stuff?
Sure, come over this weekend. I'm cleaning out my garage, so there'll be tons of trash to compact.
I'll walk over to your garage around noon with some beer.
My garbage is so compacted now that I'm able to fit twice as much in my garbage bins.
So I take it your new trash compactor is working well?
Yeah. It took a few hours to get the hang of, but now I compact almost all of my trash.
I'd be worried about injuring myself with heavy machinery like that.
My entire class acted like they were starving today.
I wonder why. Did you have something to give them?
I keep snacks because someone always comes to school hungry.
I bet they were happy to get a snack.
Yes, just a bag of crackers but it was enough.
I would ask parents to start sending a snack to school.
The class was so happy when I gave them those snacks. They were hungry because they were out running around all morning.
Why didn't they serve lunch earlier in the day knowing that ?
They are pretty rigid with schedules at this school. They won't change for any reason. That's why I brought in those snacks.
You are a thoughtful teacher. The kids must love you.
I think we should try a different approach.
Our boss won't like that.
I know but I believe his making a mistake.
We should follow orders.
I disagree, our boss will just make us look bad.
Its a big risk, we could lose our jobs.
I had an awful day at the office today!
Why? What happened? Was it Mr. Darryl again?
Yes, he was upset that we have so much extra worklog due to Covid-19 and wants me to put in more overtime to catch up!
Wait a minute, you have been working every weekend for the last 6 weeks, you have not even seen me in at least that long.
I know! Now he wants me to put in 3-4 hours of overtime during the week too!
Oh, I feel for you, Alex, that's awful. But then again, think of all the overtime money!
I didn't agree with my boss's findings so I made my own statement about them.
How did your boss react?
He was less than pleased.  He feels like I am going against him.
Are you?
Maybe a little, but I really don't agree with his interpretation about the facts.
You make a good case.
I had a disagreement with my boss.
How did that come about?
He made a presentation to the staff, and I didn't agree with it.
So you said something?
Yes, I gave my opinion.
Well, I hope your boss has an open mind.
My skin has become a bunch of scabs and I cannot get relief from the itch.
You know you'll make it worse by scratching it.
Yeah. But I cannot help but scratch it.
Do you have any cream or salve?
I do but they don't help. Nothing feels good but to scratch it.
You are going to need something for all the scarring.
I got to the counter and they told me they are done serving food for the night.
They must have just closed kitchen.
Yeah.  They close earlier now to spend more time cleaning the restaurant.
That's a good thing though.
It is, but I didn't know that.
Now you do for next time.
I was out with my friends for dinner tonight and it took forever to get the list of food we wanted.
Why did you have one list?
It was a food truck and we wanted to place a group order instead of waiting in line.
So what did you guys get?
That's the funny part. It took so long that by the time I got the list, the guy said they were done serving!
Oh no! I hope you all went to a restaurant instead.
I'm so mad!
What's wrong?
Well, I was deciding on what to get at the fast food joint near my place and there were still people in front of me. When I got to the front they told me they weren't taking orders yet!
Oh, that's so frustrating. Did you say anything?
I told them that wasn't professional.
You should write them a review on Yelp too.
Where have you been? I've waited at this coffee shop for over 45 minutes.
Sorry about that. I was running late due to traffic jam.
Was it that bad?
Yes, all lanes were filled with cars.
It's okay. Glad you're here.
Sorry again. I'll try not to be late next time.
Hey, you're finally here!
I'm so sorry I'm late.
It's okay. I don't mind waiting at this coffee shop.
You really love coffee don't you?
It's not that. One of the baristas here is really cute.
If you want, I can pretend I'm even later so you can talk to her.
I was starting to worry you were not going to show up!
Yeah I am so sorry I'm late.  I got stuck in traffic.
Oh, I hate traffic.  You should've called and told me!
Yeah I wanted to, but I left my phone at home.
Oh, I understand.
I am really sorry you had to wait.
Shoot, it stalled again
you need a new car man
no it just needs a little love
i think it needs to be put down
Hey dont talk about Bessie like
Oh crap you got her started wow
You guys are going to have to hold on for a few minutes, my car isn't starting up.
Is something broken? The engine is making clicking noises.
No, it's fine. I said I'd drive my friends around tonight and I'm a man of my word. You just have to give the car time to start up.
We'll give it 10 more minutes. If it won't start up by then, we're calling an Uber.
I dont know why this car wont start.
It seems like it doesnt like your friends.
Seriously?
No I'm just joking.
Thats funny.
I had an exciting time with Aubrey today.
What did you and Aubrey do?
We went to the stable and rode on the horses.
That must have been a lot of fun. I love horses.
It was until we mounted their wildest horses and got thrown off. Aubrey is bruised badly.
You all need to be more careful. Someone could have been hurt.
I did something daring at my horseback riding class.
Oh no. What did you do now?
Aubrey and I mounted the stable's wildest horses yesterday.
How were the horses? Did they behave?
Yes, they did. Our instructor is really good at what he does.
I think I want to start horseback riding classes.
So my coworker Remy who works the ICU night shift has a crush on me.
How do you know that?
He brought me a bunch of weird stuff from his house. Like Star Wars collectibles and things.
Like he gave the to you to keep? Do you like that stuff?
Yes to keep, and no I'm certainly not a Star Wars girl. I've had a feeling for a long time that he liked me, but I think he was just too shy to say anything.
Aww that's sweet. You should dress up like Princess Leia tomorrow night and suprise him!
Today we had a new student come to my classroom.
Was that the transfer student from Bloomingdale?
Yeah, he is really into biology and football so I let all the kids know.
That's a good way to help him make friends.
Thanks!
I am enjoying my new place to work with the new administration!
Oh cool, did you already put everything together?
Almost, Casey helped me with the administrations and is working great!
YEah, I have heard that she is pretty good at administration, you must be enjoying her work!
I am, now after Casey's work is almost all done.
I am glad to hear that, you made a good team.
I am going to miss my agent, Casey.
Casey was with you a long time.
Yes, she was. She formed my administration for me.
Where is she going?
She's retiring. She wants to travel while she still can.
You can't blame her. She's getting older.
Casey is a great agent and she helped me form my own administration for my company.
It sounds like she earns what you pay her.
She really does, i dont know what i would do without her.
How much work went into doing all that?
She has been working on this for a few months now.
She is a really special person and i hope you never lose her.
I want to make a new friend. How are you today?
I'm good! What kinds of things are you into?
Video-games, food, and the beach.
I love the beach, and I'm a foodie. Don't like video-games too much.
Well, I can work with that. Why don't we try that new restaurant on the beach.
I'm game.
I've been trying  to get more friends lately.
What have you been doing?
I just go out a lot more and make sure to introduce myself to a certain number of people each time.
Is it working to meet nice folks?
Yes I've already met a few people that are becoming friends.
That's great that you take initiative like that.
You know how my parents always tell me to get out and be social, right?
Yeah. I mean, they're not wrong. I've had the same issue and going to parties really helped me break out of my shell!
Same here. I feel great after going to that party! I met a lot of new friends tonight!
That's good news! How do you feel?
Refreshed! Like a weight lifted off my shoulders. I was the life of the party and I introduced myself to everyone!
See, I always knew you'd be a social butterfly is given the chance!
I was hoping to be able to make some new friend when we went to the bar.
I love meeting new people. How did it go?
I introduced myself to a few new people that I thought were pretty cool.
Have you seen anyone again?
Not yet. I just went this weekend.
I'm sure you'll find some new friends soon.
I was late to work because I stopped to pick up a cake.
Did you boss have a clue that you had the cake?
Nope. I told him that I had to stop for gas and there was a long line.
Good. I bet he was surprised when you all started singing happy birthday.
He was. We called him into the conference room and enjoyed cake and punch.
That probably earned you a few bonus points with your boss.
Everyone at work is calling me a suck up.
What did you do?
I brought the boss a cake.
Was it his birthday?
Yeah, but everyone else forgot.
It sounds like you were just being nice.
I totally saved the day today at the office.
What did you do this time?
I brought my boss a cake for his birthday. Everyone but me had forgotten about the birthday.
That's sweet of you to remember.
I never forget a birthday!
You are the friend every one needs !
Hey friend, how are you?
Hey Addison, I am very well how are you?
I am fine too, thank you.
Glad to hear that, tell me what's up?
You know at my office everyone has forgotten boss's birthday but not me and brought a cake, everyone was so happy.
Wow, you saved evryone's day.
I woke up this morning more refreshed than I normally am.
Oh thats right, didn't you have that job interview this morning?
I did! So I had to make sure I got good sleep the night before.
How did the interview go? Think it's promising?
I think it went really well, they already called me back for a second interview.
Nailed it! That extra rest paid off!
Hey Jared, can you help me with some interview questions today?
Sure, I can ask and pretend to be the interviewer.
Great, and I am going to make sure I get plenty of sleep tonight.
I think you are going to do superb in the interview.
Yeah, I've been preparing for over a month now!
Excellent job and get some good sleep to be ready for tomorrow.
Beautiful day isnt it.
Yeah until Mr. Micheals gave us a pop quiz
It was easy!
To you maybe, he also yelled at Eric for no reason
Wasnt he trying to talk to jill
No Mr. Micheals just has it out for everyone
It's a beautiful day.
What are you smiling about?
It's the first day of school.
School--where you listen to boring teachers who give you tons of homework.
School--where you see your friends, learn interesting things, and play sports.
Who gave you the happy pill?
I was so happy to have Mrs. Crystal this year, the rest of the kids were fussing but I just love her.
I liked having her last year, she makes it fun.
Yeah, I requested to have her.
Maybe the rest of them went to bed late and were tired.
Well shoot the vending machine has two of my favorite drinks today!
Well hurry up and decide, people are waiting to use the machine
It's a tough decision, do I want soda or coffee, hmmm
Come on, get the coffee, it's still early in the day, people are still waiting!
Ok Ok I'm putting the change in now, coffee it is!
Perfect! Now get out of the way!
I am undecided about what beverage to get, any ideas?
I like Coca Cola personaly
I like that one too, I guess I will pick that one.
Great choice, do you have enough coins.
Yes, I already put mine in te machine.
Could you lend me some?
I'm about to get a drink.
Can you get me one, too?
I'm not sure that I have enough change.
How much money does it take?
It costs seventy five cents.
I have three quarters right here.
I had borrowed Kai's power tools and I lost them.  I didn't want to tell Kai but he found out.  I really value his friendship so I told him I will replace them.
Where did you lose them?
I was working outside on my house.  I think someone took them from the driveway.
That's horrible.  Are they expensive?
I think the set is a couple hundred dollars.  I'll buy him a new set when I get paid this Friday.
That's the right thing to do.
It's raining really hard. I can barely see the road.
I think that we're approaching a flooded area.
Instead of taking this route, Ash, how about I stay at your home so that we can avoid the flood?
That sounds great. We've been drinking. We need to stop at my home. It's just a block away.
That is the perfect plan. Let's stop at your house, and I'll stay there for the night.
We're pulling in my driveway now.
It was like a torrential downpour and the road was flooded.
Sounds terrifying! Did you make it to your destination?
No, had to take a detour and spend the night at Ash’s place.
Why didn’t you just drive home?
I was drinking for hours and slightly intoxicated, didn’t think it was safe.
You did the right thing Riley.
I went to the bar with Ash last night. It was raining so hard at last call that I was afraid to drive home!
Who drove you home then?
Ash didn’t drink that much, so I crashed at his place and picked up my car the next day.
Good. That was very responsible of you.
Yeah, the roads were flooded really bad too, so it wasn’t safe for me to drive home drunk with flooded streets.
Good thinking.
Me and Kendall are not seeing eye to eye at the moment.
What happened?
I got in trouble at school today. I wasn't going to tell my mom, but Kendall told her instead.
Oh I see. Are you mad at Kendall?
Yes, very much.
Hopefully you two talk it over.
Hey, are those the clothes I donated to you because you couldn't afford new school clothes?
Oh yeah, when I got home with them the other day I was so tired I just tossed them in a pile and haven't had a chance to put them up yet.
Well, now it looks like you're going to need to wash them too because it was a week ago when I gave them to you, and they are just sitting there getting wrinkled and gathering dust.
Relax, I'll get around to putting them away and so what if I have to wash them. Why are you so upset about it, after all you did give them to me so it's not like I have to return them to you.
Yes but I gave them to you because I was under the impression you are poor and in need of clothes now. Someone in need of clothes now would have appreciated them enough to put them away at least.
Okay, if you're that concerned about it, I will wash them and put them up right now in front of you.
Really its not problem
I cant tell you how much i appreciate this
Well im not planning on having another kid, these things were just collecting dust
Yeah, but a stroller, carseat, bouncer, and a play pen?
Oh just take it
Thank you so much again
Look, those bullies are picking on the new kid again.
Ugh, I can't believe it. They are so disgusting.
I'm going to put a stop to this. You coming?
Yea. I want to give them a piece of my mind.
Do you think they are going to beat us up?
Probably, but it's worth it!
I saw a group of kids picking on another kid at school the other day.
Did you try to break it up or do something about it?
Yeah, I walked over to them and told them to leave him alone and that they weren't being appropriate.
That was nice of you to stand up for him.
I thought it was the right thing to do
So you know I had my magic routine that you've seen me practice.
Yes, it's a spectacular and lively routine!
I used it to compete in the school talent show.
Oh, that seems exciting in front of all the kids!
Yes, and I ended up winning the talent show!
Wow, I'm impressed with your magic skill!
I won the school talent show!  I'm so excited.
That's great.  What did you do?
I played piano and sang a song that I wrote.
I am so happy for you that you won.  How many other people competed?
I think there were about thirty.
Can you sing the song you performed for me?
I can't believe I won't the talent show.
What was your talent?
I tap danced with another friend.
That's so cool.
I had a lot of fun.
I'm so proud of you.
Did you make it to the school talent show?
I meant to, but sorry, something came up.
Well, I won!
I heard that you won with your magic act.
I know people have made fun of it the past, but I beat out a lot of other people.
You deserve congratulations for winning and for your perseverance.
I will never again eat raw cookie dough.
Why, what happened?
I ate some last week and ended up getting food poisoning from it.
Oh wow. Cookie dough is great. I didn't know you could get food poisoning from it.
I guess it's the raw eggs. I ate a lot of it too.
Are you feeling better?
Sorry It took me so long to get back to you, I've been sick.
What happened, you looked fine a few days ago when we hung out.
I think i got food poisoning. I made cookie dough from scratch the other afternoon.
Did you use eggs and eat it raw?
I did.  I couldn't help myself.  It was so good that I ate at least half of it.
And you wonder why you got food poisoning.  You are lucky you are over it already.
I really wish i didnt eat the cookie dough and get sick
i told you that you should have refrigerated first before you ate it
yea, i guess i have a bad habit of not listening to people and do my own thing
well i guess you learned your lesson this time
Kim, you know how much I just love raw cookie dough, right?
Sure, everyone knows that you're a freak for some raw cookie dough!
Well, last night I ate a whole tube of cookie dough, and all day I have felt weak and shaky and just generally like I don't have any energy at all.
You might have gotten food poisoning.  I've heard of that happening before.  Raw cookie dough is really not good for you.
I've never heard of that before but maybe it's the truth.  Kim, could you please drive me home?  I feel like I need to puke!
Oh my god....yes, come one, I don't want you to get sick somewhere and be uncomfortable because you're not at your own home.  You can depend on me, Kendall.
How's the job search going?
Eh...not great to be honest. I feel kind of down about it.
Don't get discouraged. It's not an easy process. You'll get there though!
Yeah, I should give another application my best shot!
You should! You are such a smart person. Any company would be lucky to have you!
Thanks for the pep talk! I can always count on you!
I was actually impressed with Remy today.
What did he do that was so impressive?
He was down for being unemployed, so he decided to volunteer at a workplace he wants a job at.
That's actually really admirable of him.
Yeah, he figured it was his best shot of getting the job.
I think he deserves to get it for showing how hard of a worker he is.
I just bummed about my prospects in getting a job.
Why? you always seem to have a knack for landing great jobs.
It's just the whole pandemic thing and all the competition out there. Too many people out looking.
Hey, what did I just say, your a great prospect.
You're right. I'm a great worker and I can give anyone a run for their money.
Let's get in there and take our best shot at it.
I have been havin some difficult time  my friend!
What's going on?
I am strugling with money,  I have no job and I have been really sad.
Times gonna change my friend, keep going and try your best to get a job and you'll be fine.
I will, I am decided to give my best shot and get a job.
That's the attitude you need, go get it.
Hey Bailey, I was checking up on you and wanted to see how you were doing.
I'm doing okay, just that it's tough when your parents are sick and you can't do anything about it.
Yeah, I understand it's not easy because you can't help.
Well, I am going to visit them in the hospital and see if they have improved under their care.
Let me know if you need anything and I'll be there to support you.
Thanks Jan, I appreciate you always being there for me.
I spent the entire day with Bailey and she was in good spirits.
Did she talk much about her difficulties?
No, it seems like she is focused on getting through her problems.
Its good that you were able to cheer her up and take her mind off her problems.
Yeah. She is a nice girl and has gone through so much lately.
Well having friends like you is a blessing.
Hey Bailey what's going on with you?
Just going through some things. Work is a little tough with all the turnover plus I'm not what's going on with Mike and I.
Really, what's happening with Mike?
Not sure, we just haven't talked in a couple days.
Hopefully he will come around. If it's meant to be, it will work out.
Okay so for the driving test I've went through countless of instructional videos and manuals to simulate something similar.
Really like what?
Well where needs to be something here about 50 feet after the U turn to simulate a speed bum.
So it's in front of the car?
Yeah just slow down to under 10 miles and drive over it.
Alright, I will.
I'm going to put a traffic cone right in front of this parking space.
But you're going to prevent cars from parking there when they should be able to.
Yes, but I want to make the driver's test course a little tricky.
I guess that's smart.
Designing the course for the driver's test is my favorite part of administering driver's tests.
Yeah, I can see you're really passionate about making sure the course is difficult.
So first I will teach them how to do some basic turns.
That sounds like a good first step.
Then we will work on parking.
I hate to prallel park.
Then I think I will put a cone out and teach obstacle avoidance.
At some point you will likely have to dodge something.
I think this one would go here
quit messing around Jan, i need the course ready for them
oh it was just a little joke
ha ha, can you move the cone from in front of my car
sure thing? have you tested it yet
was just about to
I had a good candidate for my open position but then thought otherwise after they filled out the job application.
Well what does writing something down on paper have to do with the position you have available?
The application is a formal part of the hiring process. Once Casey filled out the application, I could not offer him the position.
Why not?
Human resources wants all potential hires to have at least five years experience in the field. Casey only had four.
Wow, that must really suck. And I know you do everything by the book.
Guess who put in an application at my job today...Casey!
Really? Did he quit his job downtown or something?
Turns out that his company is moving to Texas and he doesn't want to move.
You think he'll get hired? You should put in a good word for him.
I think you've forgotten that I'm the HR manager. I make all the decisions on hiring so, yeah, I'm going to hire him.
I had to make Casey fill out the job application
you are trying to get them a job?
I want to hire them but they need to fill out the form
I hope they fill it out in time or else the spot gets filled
it should be fine I  assured them of it
that is nice of you for trying to help them
I was almost ready to hire Casey, but since he is my cousin I really need to go through the proper channels to hire him.
Yeah, you don't want it to seem like you're hiring him because he is family.
Nepotism has been a big issue at some other businesses I worked at and I want to avoid it here.
Do you think he is a good fit for the job?
Yes I really do, but I won't hire him if there is someone better and I made him aware of that.
That is good that he understands that and won't be upset if he isn't hired.
I tripped on the rug and just dropped the whole pizza on the floor.
Well now that's just great.
I am so sorry.  I will order a new pizza.
Fine.  Now what about all those bits of food scattered all over my once clean floor?
I will clean it up.  Where is your bloom and mop?
I will get them for you.
I can't believe I tripped on the sidewalk and dropped a $25 pizza.
Did you go back to the pizzeria to see if they will give you another one?
No, they don't care. Its not their problem once you leave.
But it happened on their sidewalk
I know. The owner helped me clean it up but no replacement pizza.
Well, I'm glad you got Chinese instead
Ah! I dropped my pizza.
No worries! Easy clean up.
I'm really sorry. I hate to make a mess and waste food.
Seriously no worries, not a big deal.
Ahh I feel bad still. I can order another.
That works! Don't worry man. Accidents happen.
Can't wait to get home tonight.
Yeah it has been a long evening.
Wow, what is all this?
This is your surprise party!
Thanks so much, I needed this.
Of course, have fun.
This was such a wonderful suprise
yeah man its great that you came out to see what we did
Thank you guys so much this is an awesome surprise party
I know right.  It took a while to get this party all set up for you, but you seem a little jovial as well
I am so grateful to have each and everyone of you in my life.  This is amazing
I know man.  We are aware of that
I'm so surprised!
Wow surprise man happy b day.
Yah this is great first time.
Want to open your gifts.
Yes that would be great.
Yea that would be a lot of fun.
Jesse do you have that new Portfolio I asked for?
You're not gonna believe this Robin.
What is it? Did you find something big Jesse?
Well. There's just this one small thing from that case you asked me to look into.
Gee Willickers! This could blow the case wide open. Good find Jesse.
I thought you might like this turn of events.
I'm feeling free.
Yes I was working your case.
Oh man, that's awesome
Yea we are all free now.
Let's shoot for a book deal.
I 'm so happy.
I didn't think that Jesse would take his job so seriously as to burn my case.
What do you mean burn your case?
Jesse works for Edward Nigma and literally burned my case.
Was he joking and pranking you or did he really burn your case?
He wasn't joking and I am mad.
I would be mad too. I think he is losing his mind.
Thanks for letting me back in. Sorry I got so angry earlier.
Just don't let it happen again! What made you so mad?
I just hated what Jess was saying. None of it is true and she knows it
Yah I get that, but you still have to hold it together, we're all adults here.
I know... I need to watch my temper.
Agreed. don't let it happen again.
I'm back in the poker room now.
Oh did you get more money?
Not yet, but I think they're going to let me have a marker. They just invited me back in.
Oh that's good. Next time don't go all in so quickly.
Well that's how you win money.
Or lose it!
I am nervous about going in there.
Its all good. The room is your friend.
The room does not like me. The room gives me angry looks.
But we are part of the room. The room is part of us.
I don't belong to the room. I am not part of the room. There is no room for me.
Lets at least try. For we are powerful windows.
Thanks for beinging me back into the room, I don't like being left outside alone.
Sorry, I didn't mean to leave you out for long. I needed some privacy for a few minutes.
I understand, it's your house and if you need privacy I am fine with that.
It won't happen again, I promise. I had a horrible day at work and needed time to chill.
I'm glad you could chill and get your mind off work. Do you need anything, or need to talk?
I am fine for now, just a bad day at work. Thanks for asking.
I was rehearsing a scene with my fellow actor.  He just yelled at me so I walked right off stage.
Was that part of your scene.
No, yelling and screaming like a mad man was not on the script.
Are you going back?
I haven't decided yet. I don't vibe with him.  Probably not if I have to work with him.
You shouldn't have to tolerate bad behavior.
I am done with stupid play. So done.
Well, you keep fudging your lines.
Its called improving!!
No, its called not studying your character.
I play the best Hamlet in the industry!!
But we're doing Death of a Salesman, you idiot!
You said it was your back tire?
yea i think on the passanger side
Definitely flat, let me get my jack
thanks you are always prepared
i try to be, this will be a quick fix
youre the best addy
Cameron, you look freezing, are you okay?
No dude, falling in the snow was the worst idea.
Yeah but it was fun rolling down the hill! Do you need help?
That would be nice.
Okay, here are some towels. Let's get you home.
Sounds good.
Here put these towels over your shoulders
thanks im so cold
well who told you to go outside in the snow in a t shirt
i was just so excited for it
i know you sure love snow
im going back out after i warm up
I hope these towels will help you warm up
i think i was getting pretty close to frostbite
just make sure you get inside soon and take those wet clothes off
i cant wait to go to bed because i am so tired
i bet you are from working all day
I bought a new dress for my girlfriend.
What is the occasion?
We are going to a dance.
This is not a school event, then?
It is. Do you not know about it?
I only know about spring formal and the prom, nothing about anything in the winter.
I hope you like your clothes I worked really hard on them.
They look amazing, you are the best Jan
Im really glad you liked them, I made then thinking of every detail.
I can see that the craft behinds the clothes is impressive.
I think its one of my best works until now.
I'm so glad I get to wear it, my friends will be envious.
I finally finished the order for my customer Addison.
That was an order for tailor made clothing right? What all did they order?
There were quite a few pieces, tops and bottoms, took six weeks.
6 weeks is a long time to spend on an order for one person.
Yeah. We had measurements fittings and final fittings but it paid well.
Well as long as you got paid it was worth it then.
I've been trying to find ways to give back to my community lately.
I volunteer at the food bank. What have you tried doing?
I've decided to donate a lot of my money to charity.
That's a great idea, Lee. I've got the names of good good, reputable charitable organizations to help you decide which to donate to.
I will donate this money to the charity.
This is a lot of money, Lee?
Yes. It is to give back for the effort to the local community.
I hope everyone will do the same.
I hope too.
I salute you, Lee.
I've been pushing for more community support. Would you like to donate to the charity for our local community?
Did you donate to the charity? I need more information.
I have donated a lot of money towards our local community. What information do you need?
How much of the donation actually goes into the community.
All of us are volunteers so 95% goes into the community. The 5% that doesn't goes into administrative fees, permits, etc.
I'll write a check right now.
I really want to do something positive in the community.
How do you plan on doing that?
I think that a donation would really help everyone out.
That would be an amazing gesture, but to what organization?
I was thinking to the local food bank.
That is an excellent idea!
Hey are you guys excited for the game?
Yes we can't wait for it to start!
Me either, where are you guys sitting?
We will be in the first set of bleachers.
Ok I'll look for you since I'll be watching from the bench because of my ankle injury.
Ok we will wave to you from our seats.
i felt like a hero today
did you save someone
kind of
what'd you do
i saw a spider on the fence but decided not to kill it
i guess technically you're a hero.
Some people hate spiders but i think they;re cute
Spiders get a bad rap and they eat all the annoying insects
i wish more people realized this before killing them
atleast we know and we would never hurt them
You know I love short stories right?
Yeah.
I'm going to whip out a load for my english class.
Wonder how your teacher will feel about that.
I think i have a great idea for my next story that im going to write
Oh, what is it this time? is it about a cat i guess?
No, its about a monkey that can grant three wishes but they turn into bananas when they are granted
I can see how that would be a funny read and i want to read it when youre done.
I think im going to name the monkey after you
I just finished writing my short story.
It seems like you are always writing short stories.
I am. I wrote a bunch for English class.
Does your teacher like them?
Yes, she said they were a lot of fun to read.
I'm glad to hear that!
Do you think the teacher will like all these short stories?
Did you put a lot of effort into them?
Yah! They are like my favorite thing right now so I feel like my excitement shows in the efforts
Oh then I think she will like them! Short stories are always fun
Yah I hope so! If not it'll have been a big waste of time.
You'll have to let me know what she says!
I'm getting better at writing short stories.
How'd you get an interest in that.
I wrote a lot of them in English class.
Did your teacher like them?
Yeah, so I kept writing some more, do you want to read them?
I'd love to read some of them.
Tracy, you know what you have to do.
Yes sir. I will run the army with utmost integrity.
You are a fine man Tracy.
I am just honored to have gained your trust sir.
You earned my trust long before I put you in charge.
I met the lead sing Carson.
Did you pass out from meeting him?
Almost, I just kept starting at him. I couldn't say a word.
You don't need to talk to get a picture.
He posed for 3 with me.
I am so attracted to Carson.
Wow, she must me special.
I feel just star struck in love.
This sounds serious to me.
The first time I met her, I was so attracted to her that I was tongue tied.
I'm happy for you that you may have found someone for the long run.
I really love Quinn. She's so sweet.
I know. I wish I was as nice as her. What did she do now?
She came over and helped me prepare dinner for my date tonight. She's such a good cook and I'm terrible!
That was really awesome of her! Doesn't she teach night school tonight?
She does! She's so busy but she still came over to help.
Well hopefully it all pays off and your date goes well.
It’s so silly being indecisive, not sure what I would do without Sasha.
You need to make up your own mind Remy.
Sasha seems to know what is best for me and so I will shave my head.
Shave your head? Isn’t that ludicrous?
Not at all! And she decided that we will eat chicken nuggets for dinner.
That’s laughable!
Bald or  high top fade? Nuggets or hot dogs! Decisions decisions!
Just go with what you prefer?
The thing is I prefer both equally in both cases! What do you think?
The high top seems kinda played out so try a bald cut, and hot dogs way worse health wise than chicken nuggets and that's saying something so get the nuggets
Man, I envy your decisiveness!
Indecision is the... dang I forgot my quote.
Riley, go away. I'm not ready to get up yet.
I'm not going away. I want to hear all about it. I see some lipstick on the collar and smell some nice, expensive perfume, too.
Go away...I'll talk to you later. I just got to sleep. I don't care about the makeup or smells.
Okay, but I'm making you promise to tell tell me the whole story.
If I promise, will you leave me alone for the rest of the day?
You got i! I'll be downstairs when you're ready to talk!
I hate it when my foot falls asleep
I sure do hate that too
I do not like how it feels like there are needles in my foot and all
exactly.  There is a lot of pain in the feet
Yeah, I just hope it will subside and go away soon
right, same here
Oh my god my foot fell asleep and it’s killing me.
We’ve been sitting here for a long time listening to this lecture.
You think we’d have a break by now.
We should’ve had a few breaks by now.
Hopefully it’s over soon and we can get out of here because I need to move around.
I’m starving as well.
Quinn, we will meet up later.
What time do you get off work?
I'm off at 6.
You want to grab some dinner?
Sounds great. Meet me in the lobby at 6.
I look forward to catching up with you.
I think we should totally meet later
Why is that ?
Because I have work at the moment and I think that work is crucial
It really is.  We have got to pay the bills somehow
Thats right
Im looking forward to seeing you
i never knew i would be someone famous in my town
i heard about you saving someone's life
i feel like a celebrity with so many people trying to shake my hand
i guess this is your 15 minutes of fame then
I received some really positive feedback recently.
Oh really. What was it in regards to?
Well I've always been considered my self a simple person but then I saved that persons life.
Yeah that does change things.
It is just nice to be recognized.
You should be very proud of yourself.
That dog in my neighbors yard is so sad.
Oh really?
Yes, the dog is outside by itself a lot of the time.
That's sad, can you do anything?
I threw a bone out there last night, the dog seemed really happy afterwards.
Oh, that's so nice of you.
Your dog seemed really bored and was getting anxious.
He seems fine now.
Well, I threw him a bone that I found in the garbage so he chewed on that for about an hour, then buried what was left of it.
In what garbage did you find a bone? And how big was it?
It was in your neighbor's garbage by the curb. It was pretty big. Like the length of a femur bone.
And that didn't seem at all suspicious to you?
i really wish cameron wouldnt make fun of me when i speak up at work
it's hard already to speak in front of crowds but he just makes it work
maybe i will say something to the boss if he keeps it up
I think you should. he really has been annoying lately and needs to be put in his place
i guess i will see what he does next time i speak
What gives Cameron? Why are you dissing me in front of others?
I'm just having a little fun.
I don't like it. It's not cool to speak of me like you do with the people I work with.
Chill out. You need to relax and play along.
This is work and you need to take things more seriously.
Okay. Okay. Have it your way.
I swear I'm going to punch Cameron.
What did Cameron do now?
He's a jerk. Every time it's his turn to talk at work, he tries to make fun of me, in some way.
Just tell him to knock it off.
I have...many times. That's why I'm ready to punch him.
I think I understand now.
I'm happy to report they're finally making some improvements at the warehouse.
Great! You getting some new equipment in there?
Yup, they installed some of the units today. Including a brand new trash compactor.
Great! That'll make things a little bit easier for you.
It really will. I kept loading trash into it today and it's super-efficient.
Neat. That's nice that your company is stepping up at last.
We got a new trash compactor at work I love it!
That's always nice to havem did you put your garbage in it?
I did, it's fully functional, I dont have to go outside anymore
What a relief, it's in short distance
I hope it stays in order it's been a load off for me
Yeah especially when the old one was a 5 minute walk away
I think Robin is a rat.
Does this have anything to do with the fact that you are standing in a jail cell?
She brought me to the attention of the police when she realized I was a wanted criminal.
Did you think she was going to bake you a cake?
That would be nice, especially if she bakes a file or a saw inside the cake.
Quit dreaming and help me pick out an attorney for you.
I feel betrayed by Robin after she brought me to the police's attention.
Why would Robin do such a thing like that to a good friend like you?
Robin realized that I was a wanted criminal and refused to have anything more to do with me.
Well, that's not right. Robin doesn't have a clean record herself.
I know, she's in no place to judge me!
You could always get revenge on her for tattling.
I was concerned about the noise coming from the hood of my car.
What kind of noise?
It was this strange noise like metal grinding together.  I stopped driving on the side of the road, popped the hood to check it out.
What did you find out?
I wasn't sure what was wrong with it.  I called roadside assistance and they sent a tow truck.
Is your car fixed now?
The car made some weird noises today. I pulled to the side and checked under the hood.
What was wrong with it?
I honestly don't know. I only know the basics and it wasn't any of that.
So you need to take it to a mechanic.
I have an appointment to see the garage tomorrow.
I am sure they'll fix it for you. Good luck that they find it!
Hi there, hope you had a good day, but my day sucked.
Oh man, what happened?
The wife, twins and I were out for a Sunday drive, then the car started making a weird noise, so we stopped and popped the hood.
Something like that happened to me not too long ago, it turned out the the air filter cover came loose, simple fix.
Well, it was something I couldn't figure out after looking, so we ended up calling our roadside service company, and they towed the car home for us.
I'll come over and take a look after work tomorrow, it might be something we can both figure out.
I got Jesse's parents a gift for their anniversary.
When is the party?
Tonight at 7 pm.
They've been married a long time.
Yes, i really hope they like the gift.
They should since Jesse told you what to get them.
Jesse's parents have been married for a long time.
They seem to have a very stable marriage.
It was their anniversary recently and I got them a gift.
They must be so happy you're in their lives.
I'm going to let everyone know about this airline.
How will you expose them?
I'm posted my feelings on social media.
I like that idea.
Did you see my comments that I posted about Duke airlines
I saw it and wondered what did they do to you
Can you imagine customer care delayed me until I missed a flight
How did that happen
They kept rechecking my flight ticket even when I insisted that I had bought it from their agent. They found out when it was too late
Damn! we should post on their link social media page until they do something
The airline treated me like trash.
I thought that you had a medical note saying that you did not have to wear a mask, because of your medical condition.
It didn't matter, they kicked me off the flight. I posted on their facebook site and they got back to me.
What are they going to do to right the situation they caused?
They are give me free tickets, and paying my fees.
I tweeted about the harassment I got on that flight.
Are you sure that is a good idea? You sounded like you were drunk.
I only had 2 drinks. They didn't have to stop the plane just because I was singing out loud to The Wiz.
Uhh. That is enough to annoy anyone.
The world needs to know about my mistreatment.
I did not like how the airline treated me.
What did you do?
I posted my concerns on social media.
Did you get a reply from the airline?
I'm glad I followed my dream.
You could've made a lot of money though.
It wouldn't be worth it.
Whatever. I'm glad you're happy then.
I'm going to follow my dream.
My goals are going to work out.
You are doing so well at life.
Yea it's all i do is work.
It will pay off.
It always does.
My sister actually made me use a fork to eat my pizza last night.
I never heard of that before.
Kendall said that's what all fancy people do and I told her I don't want to be fancy.
Eating with your hands is one of the best things about eating pizza.
My mom asked me to just try it to make Kendall happy.
I am glad I have a brother, he doesn't care how we eat.
Hey what's for dinner?
I bought pizza come sit down and have some.
Nice! I love pizza!
Here I got you a plate and a fork.
A fork for pizza?
Yes, it is fancy to eat pizza with a fork.
I had to eat my pizza with a fork when Kendall and I went to dinner.
That's not usually how you eat a pizza.
It was a fancy restaurant not a pizza joint and he said it was the proper thing to do.
Did it feel weird to eat it in little bits?
I'm used to the whole sensation of holding it but it was fine and the other diners did the same.
I guess it won't change the taste just to cut it first.
Just give me the remote control Casey!
No I am watching my favorite show you will have to wait!
I am not waiting for your show to be over!
Let go of my hand what are you doing?
Now you'll give me the remote won't you?
Why did you smash my fingers in the door jam?
My mom is going to kill me when she gets home.
Why what did you do?
Casey and I were fighting over the remote, and I accidentally wedged her fingers in the door jam. I think one of them is broken.
Oh no! Yeah your mom is going to go ballistic. Do you need to take Casey to the doctor?
I don't know. Right now I have her hand in a bucket of ice to try and get the swelling down.
Well if you need to take her to the doctor call me back and I'll come right over.
I think I went a little overboard with the break yesterday.
What happened?
I lost track of time, and the break became 45 minutes instead of 30.
Did it affect the rest of your day?
No, it was a very slow day.
OK, so then its not that bad at all.
I had such a rough day today, another fight with Carson.
What happened this time, he seems to be a thorn in your side.
I called a fifteen minute break and got called into a meeting right away.  I took a half hour and when I got back, everyone else was back to work but him.
Where was he?
He was sitting in the break room.  He said that he was on break until I called him back, and that the other guys were fools for going back after fifteen minutes
I hope you go to HR with this, you shouldn't have to handle this with out them and some mediation.
I asked some girl out today.
When you went to get coffee?
Yeah, her name is Kendall, she is beautiful.
Is that why it took you so long to get back to the office.
Don't tell anyone else at work.
I won't, I hope the date goes well.
Hi Kendall. Are you having coffee today.
Yes, I'm drinking a latte with caramel and whip cream.
That looks so good.
It is good. What are you drinking?
I'm pulling my chair over to your table. I'm drinking black coffee. Would you like to go out on a date sometime soon.
I would love to go on a date.
I'm a bit tired after helping John move.
I had no idea you were helpig him move.
He couldn't find a van to move his furniture, so I offered my truck to help him move over the weekend.
That is nice of you.
He actually gave me a little money as a gesture.
It'd be a nice gesture for you to treat me out to dinner with that money.
How is it possible that there is no vans available to rent for me to move this weekend?
It is the start of the college semester, which means everyone is moving into their dorms or apartments.
Well that puts a huge damper on my plans to move than doesn't it?
If you want, I have a truck and my plans got canceled for this weekend, so I would be willing to help out.
No way! If you are offering, I am for sure going to accept!
Just let me know what time and where to be.
I know you're planning on moving out of your apartment this Friday. I also noticed you don't seem to have lined up a moving company yet.
No, everyone I called is booked solid for the next few months. Plus, my brothers and cousins are all working, or out of town. I'm running low on options.
I have a truck. How about you let me help you get moved on Friday. You can pay me back with dinner and drinks next week.
Oh my god, that would be so great! Forget dinner. I'm taking you to the ball game this weekend. Great seats and you can scarf down all the hot dogs you can stand.
That sounds great. But, let's see how it goes first.
Really, you're a lifesaver. Thank you.
How is the move going John?
OK I guess, but I am really struggling with finding a moving van.
Are they really expensive?
They're outrageous, and you can only rent them for a very short window.
If you'd like, you are more than welcome to use my truck to move.
That would be amazing Alex!
OK now that the boat is pushed out, grab the oars!
Will do! Wow this lake is so pretty and remote
I know, that's why it's my favorite
How often do you come here?
At least once a month
I don't blame you!
I love coming up here to the mountains and getting away from the city.
This lake feels like we're in the middle of nowhere.
The air is so fresh and clean, let's take the boat out for a ride
Great idea, should I get in now?
No, let me push it out into the water before you hop in.
Do you need a hand to help you push?
I kept trying to call Ash.
I thought he left his phone here.
Let me check, you were right. I just checked it and there are 7 missed calls from me.
He took Amy's phone, call that number.
I see you've been calling me.
Yea but no answer what is going on?
Yea, sorry my phone is broke!
Oh wow, that is bad.
I through it in the snow and it broke.
I'm sorry.
Hey friend, How are you?
I am good how are you Ash?
I am fine thank you, I wanted to tell you something about Bailey.
Yes please, tell me.
Bailey has been trying to call me but there was no answer from me, so he checked my phone.
Oh, Okay but why did not you answer?
My hamburgers were a hit again at the cookout.
You cook the most juicy burgers.
Everyone likes them.  Most people came back for seconds.
I like to add bacon to your burgers.  They are so delicious that way.
People are suggesting that I open up my own burger joint.
I would eat there.
Honestly I am considering going into acting.
Really? I have honestly been thinking about that profession as well.
I mean look at our friends, they have so much fun with it.
They do and they also get paid extremely well.
That is so true. I mean, who wouldn't want to get paid to play dress up?
Right? I am going to start signing up for some acting classes.
I didn't know how hard it was to learn lines as an actor.
Yeah, it looks so simple to get up on stage and act. Never thought much about our buddies jobs.
I might need to reconsider being an actor, I did it to hook up with the ladies.
Well, to hook up with the ladies you'll need to be a pretty good actor!
Did you really just say that?
Yep.
I'm so excited to start my new career as an actor! After seeing how much fun Jake was having I couldn't not give it a try.
Dude me too! We could become rich and famous, and have fun in the process. We could be living the dream
I hope that we can make it... Hopefully knowing some people will help us get our foot in the door.
Me too... But we are both good looking and have a background in theatre, so that should help.
That's true... Either way it will be a fun experience.
Yes! I'm so excited.
Its crazy that there was a sale on all these clothes out here.  I am glad that there were a lot of deals
I know right.  the clothing deals are great
There are so many options to choose from
I think you should start to take them to the counter
That is certainly not a bad idea.  I cant wait to do that so I officially own them
Yeah youre so right.  Itll be nice
I was out shopping and picked lots of items.
Did you intend to buy them all?
I did, and took the clothes to the counter.
I hope you didn't have to spend too much on them.
Do you like any of these outfits on the rack?
A few of them suit you I think.
Okay I will just add them to the cart.
I will meet you over by the counter, okay?
Sounds good, I will head over now actually.
It looks like you have so many items in the cart.
Yikes, I can't believe how much money I spent today.
How much did you spend?
Like $300. I was supposed to be saving that too.
Well, all of us succumb to shopping fever occasionally. What did you buy?
I bought some jeans, a skirt, a couple of tee shirts, and a fancy dress for my next date. I also got a cute pair of earrings. When I went up to the counter and they rung me up I almost passed out when I saw the total.
I hope all those clothes were worth it!
I'm going to look up my test grade online right now.
Are you nervous to see your score?
A little, but I studied so hard.
That makes me the most nervous.
Okay, I looked, I did very good.
Congrats on the good score.
I studied for hours last night.
That is the best way to approach a test.
I was prepared for the test when I left for school.
How did you do on it?
I took it and got a very good grade on it.
Looks as if something sunk into that thick skull of yours.
Yes! I got an A on that Economics test!
Congrats! I know you studied all night for that one.
I actually studied all week for that one! I needed that A to keep my GPA up there.
You did a great job, I know your grades are important to you.
Well it's just a waste of time if you aren't doing your best at what you are doing!
True, I like that philosophy!
I owe Sydney money!
What do you owe him money for?
For some outstanding bills and last quarter's taxes.
Do you owe a lot?
Yes, but I need to pay Sydney otherwise he will get in trouble.
I hope it doesn't impact your savings too much.
I'm so happy I have my second job. I've finally been able to save up.
Yes, but you're killing yourself doing it.
No, I'm fine. Plus, I'm just about done. I paid Sydney what I owed her for Bill's taxes.
That's a good thing. You needed that off your back.
Yes, seriously. So now I'm going to work for a few more weeks and then quit.
Sorry I'm late. I had to stop by Sydney's place and pay her money.
Why did you have to pay Sydney?
I had to pay bill's taxes.
How much did you owe?
I owed $1,000.
I'm in so much trouble!
Why? what happened?
My mom had baked a pie this morning and I accidentally ate the whole thing!
What! How can you fit an entire pie in your stomach?
I just couldn't help myself! My mom is so mad because it was supposed to be for the whole family.
Maybe you can bake another one now!
I just ate a whole cherry pie my mom made. She is going to be so mad because it was for the whole family.
That's a lot of food. Why did you do it?
It looked so good. I just couldn't stop myself.
You sound like you might have a binging problem.
Yeah, maybe I need to get some help because this kind of thing happens a lot.
I'm so hungry right now after that three hour field hockey practice.
Hey that's great and didn't your mum say she baked a pie for the family to eat?
Oh, that was for the family because I just ate all of it.
What, I can't believe you were that greedy!
I wasn't greedy, I said I was hungry.
Remy, I tell you, sometimes I do wonder about you.
Jordan is such an amazing stylist. She did my hair the night before my big beauty pageant.
How did you do? Did you win?
I didn't win but I was the runner up. I think the judges like the winner's talent more.
What was her talent?
She did contortions on stage. She could wrap her legs around her head.
She's super flexible then.
Jordan is the reason that I won the pageant!
It does make a difference when you have a person like her doing your hair and makeup perfectly.
She is one of the best!
You also won because of that killer routine you did in the final round. It wasn't just your looks.
No, but looking like I did helped!
I hate the sound of that machine.
I'm sorry it is bothering you.
Yeah, I have autism and it makes me very sensitive to noise.
Well, maybe we can get you some sound cancelling headphones.
I would like that very much.
I was diagnosed with Autism since I was a kid. I am very particular about specific details so I am careful about how I do things. I know not everyone gets me.
Everyone is unique in their own way.
I have felt different my whole life. I struggle with controlling my emotions. I have outbursts that can be scary for people, even my family who have known me all of my life.
Are you seeing someone for your issues?
My psychologist, Anthony, has been working with me for the last couple of years.
It's great that you are getting help.
I tend to notice really small details about things when I do anything compared to most people.
Is that because of your autism?
I guess, but I am such a high functioning person with autism that sometimes people don't even notice anything is different about me.
If no one told me you had autism I would not know.
I guess that is good because sometimes I feel like people will judge me because of it.
They shouldn't do that because you are a very bright and intelligent person.
I am so excited I got the job at the tech company I told you I was applying for!
That is awesome Remy, I am so happy for you! With so many other applicants that is amazing you got the position.
Me too! There were about 100 other applicants and they chose me for the position!
Will you give 2 weeks notice at your current job? When will you start?
Yes, I will give 2 weeks notice today so right after that I will start! I am so happy and excited.
Congratulations my friend! Happy days are ahead for you!
I can't believe I got the job!
You seemed to be the right fit for the role.
I didn't think they would pick me out of the 100 people that applied.
That is very lucky, but you should be proud of yourself too.
You are right and I am because I have been trying so hard.
I am so happy for you.
There's this new subject in school that I am interested in.  I've spent the last couple of days studying the history of it in detail.
What is the subject?
It's a botany class and we'll be taking lots of field trips so that we can study living things in their natural habitat.
Fascinating. You should take that class. You love being in nature.
I feel like I study things in nature on my own already so to be among people of like minds would be amazing.
It's a perfect fit.
My Christmas party was a big hit. I wish you could have been there.
I do, too. But, I had to visit my mother in Dallas.
I know. There were about 50 people there. I invited everyone who I knew didn't have any family to celebrate with.
That is a really nice thing for you to do for everyone.
Thanks but I think I get more enjoyment out of it than anyone else.
I'm throwing a big Christmas party. Do you want to come?
Sure, that sounds great! Who else are you inviting?
I'm inviting all of my friends who won't be spending Christmas with their family, and I know you weren't able to book a plane trip down to visit your family out of state.
Aww, that's so sweet. I really appreciate it. Nobody likes being alone on Christmas.
One of my kids has been having a hard time understanding and stopped by my office.
Did you set up a tutor program, like you did with the other kids?
I did, he has been coming twice a week for the last couple weeks and I can already see improvement in class and his grades.
You are amazing! The extra time you give those kids really helps.
One of my students stopped by my office after school today.
What did they want to talk about?
They explained that they have been having trouble understanding the work so asked for some help.
Wow, that takes a lot of confidence.
I agree, I agreed to help them understand the work.
That's great Skylar.
I can't believe I overslept.
I hope you didn't have any important things to do today.
I did. I missed my appointment for a job interview.
Is there any way you can reschedule it?
I don't think it would matter. Me missing it already doesn't look good.
Hopefully you can get a better alarm clock.
The club was packed, most of the time I could not see Sasha.
It is better to go there on Sunday night, if you don't want to be packed in like sardines.
Yeah, it was forever before I found her again.
You can always ask Davie to call her name over the intercom.
I cant believe I broke that vase.
Do you think you will be able to find a replacement?
Maybe, but it won't be as nice.
Lets head downtown and hit some shops.
I hope I can find something as nice.
We will, we just have to get shopping.
I don't know why the baby is crying I was only holding him for a second.
He doesn't really like strangers so it isn't anything you did.
I feel like every time I hold a baby it cries so I feel like they don't like me.
That isn't true, he just has to get used to you.
If I come around more then he will get used to me I hope.
Yeah, come over tomorrow and I bet he will be a little different than today.
I finally told the truth to Sydney about why I haven't been in school lately.
How did she convince you?
She kept asking, so I made her promise she wouldn't get angry.
Did she get angry after you told her the truth?
No, she stuck to her word and was calm.
That's good of her.
I was scared to talk to Sydney.
Did you think she would be mad?
Yeah, but she promised not to be angry.
Did you believe her?
Yeah, so I told her everything and answered the questions.
It pays to be honest.
I am going to wing my soccer trophy to see how deep it goes.
I am throwing my third grade skate dancing trophy over.
I bet you mine goes further and makes a bigger splash
No way, this bowling trophy is much bigger and heavier, so I have the winner.
Well, lets try this one. Not sure what it is. Never heard of a Stanley Cup.
Okay, its pretty big. I can help you wing that one over and we'll both win.
I have a lot of trophies.
Yes you do. What are you going to do with them ?
Maybe I'll throw them off of a bridge.
Good idea.
Yes like that, I can give them to the world.
That's a great way to show the world.
I got rid of my trophies. I threw them off a bridge. Good riddance.
Oh wow. Did you hate your wins that much?
I hate being tied to winning. I want to do things because I love them not for the reward.
I know you have been an athlete forever. It must be tough feeling so much pressure.
Yeah, it is. But now I'm going to be free of that.
I thought Carson looked great today in his new outfit.
What was Carson wearing?
He had a new suit that fitted him really well.
That's good for him.
Carson was looking really smart at school.
What was he dressed in?
It is a brand new outfit that looked so good that I complimented him.
I bet that boosted his mood.
Carson's outfit looks amazing; especially the colors.
I agree, it really suits him.
I might go and pay Carson a compliment about his new outfit.
I think Carson would like that.
I hope he likes my outfit too.
I am sure he will.
Wow, Carson looked great today!
What was he wearing?
It must have been a brand new outfit.
Where did you see him?
He showed up to school today wearing it.
That's so cool.
Oh my God, it was so horrible. The cars slammed into each other right in front of me.
How horrible. Was it really gruesome?
It was ghastly. The baby's skull was completely caved in. Just crushed.
Good lord. A baby? I can't imagine what that must have been like.
It was a nightmare. The blood and the people screaming, I'll never be able to get it out of my mind.
I'm so sorry you had to see that. Why do such terrible things have to happen?
What a horrible sight. I am traumatized. I can't get the scene out of my head
I heard about the horrendous accident. Poor little baby. I can't stop crying.
I need to go back and find out what happened to the baby.
Don't Kai. I don't think the baby made it. We can send our condolences.
Oh man. I can't deal with it. Its going to be a long night.
I'll stay with you!
I just drove by that accident near main street.
I heard about it that on the news.
Yeah. It was horrible.
Did anybody get hurt?
There was blood everywhere. I saw a baby with its skull completely crushed.
I don't want to hear anymore about it.
It was so crazy out there! The crowd was starting to break through the barricade!
Your fans love you, Aubrey. Are you okay?
I'm fine, but that was the first time an autograph signing ever turned into a riot! I've never had to get security to push the fans back. They were getting over run and beat up out there!
You're fine now. That's what you can expect when you sell fifty million copies of your new album!
Situations like this make me not to even want to be an entertainer any more.
Don't feel that way. The fans only go crazy for you because they love you so much! And they throw their money at you faster than you can count it!
The crowd got really rowdy seeking autographs.
What happened? Did you get hurt?
I did not, but they were pushing against security and almost ran them over.
Those fans can be intimidating sometimes.
It makes me wonder if they truly care about me at all.
I don't think so.
The crowd was like closing in on me when I was signing autographs outside my hotel. I had to ask security to push them back.
You have to be careful in crowds.
They can get out of control.
You are a celebrity now that you've been on that show.
It's the cost of fame. Everyone wants a piece of you, as they say.
You are paid handsomely for that.
Stop! Please stop now!
No. Your wife will soon be gone forever.
Oh my God, how could you do that to my wife.
Because of what you did to me and my family.
No God no.
Did you hear something like a gunshot?
I heard it too. it sounded like it came from upstairs.
Be really quiet and make sure you grab the gun from the nightstand
Is that Quinn standing up there on top of the stairs?
I think he killed your wife while we were sleeping
let's take her outside and dispose of her
I always knew that Quinn never forgave Lindsey for leaving him for me all those years ago.
You poor thing.  I can't imagine lying right next to her when she was shot.
Honestly, I've blocked that out and am focused on getting justice for Lindsey.
You mean seeing Quinn convicted?
I mean seeing Quinn get what he deserves, then I'll morn.
I will be here for you when you need.
I grew up getting all sorts of bumps and scrapes so I know how to treat small injuries very well.
Wow, that's unfortunate but has it come in useful?
My friend fell off of his bike and I knew exactly what he needed.
It's great that you were able to help.
I fell off my bike many times, so I knew how to help my friend.
Did your friend get injured badly falling from a bike?
No, just some scrapes, so I applied some soothing cream.
So you carry around that ointment with you everywhere?
Yes, out of habit from falling down a lot.
Do you wear a helmet a lot, too?
I just fixed up my friend's scrape they fell off the bike and scraped their leg.
That's really nice of you to help your friend.
Yeah, I know all about first aid
Are you sure that's the right product to use?
I shot my first deer!
On your hunting trip with your friend?
Of course, on my hunting trip! You think I did it at the zoo? What kind of a loser do you think I am? I got a great shot and now I am a pro!
A pro? I doubt that. How many points?
Oh, I didn't have to pay any points. Since my friend did all the really hard work, I doubt I will earn anything. He tracked the deer, he snuck up on his prey. And then, he shot it clean through the heart using his bow and arrow.  But I got the shot that counts!
You shot a photo didn't you? You shot a photo of a dead animal. That doesn't make you a pro!
It was my first time hunting when we went to Alaska.
Did you enjoy it?
I liked being in the wilderness, but I don't think I'll go again.
Really? Why not?
If I had to hunt to eat, I would. But I just really don't enjoy killing an animal.
I didn't think you would. I could see you just shooting photographs instead.
I am really excited to skin what I caught.
Yeah I feel that, what did you catch when you went hunting?
I was able to kill a deer!
Wow that is awesome man. I am so stoked.
Yeah it was a great thing to do and to try.
For sure man keep it up.
I bought my wife a new necklace for our anniversary, do you think she will like it?
That looks very expensive and shiny so yeah man I think she'll like it.
Come on man, don't be smart do you really like it?
Yes I do, she will love it I am being serious now.
It is her favourite colour so I think it will be her favourite one yet.
She is a lucky woman if you can afford something like that.
I want to surprise Jan with a present for our anniversary.
That's exciting what are you planning on getting her?
Oh it's just a little present to celebrate our anniversary.
What is it?
It's a necklace, but you mustn't tell Jan, I want it to be a surprise.
I will keep my mouth shut.
Quinn is still learning to cook, but he is trying.
Do you think he will be ready in time for his date this weekend?
Probably but he did ask me for help cooking dinner.
That is nice of you to do.
I just want his date to go well.
Me too, he deserves some happiness and it would make him look good.
Quinn has been trying so hard, so I couldn't refuse when he asked for help cooking the dinner.
It was nice of you to help.
There's some real talent there. The dishes he prepares are quite unique.
I've always thought he had potential to be a great chef.
That's obvious. It's something innate, you either have it or you don't.
I think that's great. He has been so excited about it.
You know, Lee really cleans up nice when he tries.
Oh really? I always see him in the same old sweatpants.
You should have seen his outfit for my birthday party. It was legendary.
I wish I could have been there. What was he wearing?
White tie and tails. Actual tails. Like animal tails.
Oh, very funny. He's a witty one.
Did you see Lee?
I didn't, is everything okay?
Yes, he got all dressed up for my birthday celebration.
Wow, he really went all out for you!
Lee said he is all ready for my birthday party.
Did he get all dressed up?
He was dressed really well.
I'm sure wanted to look his best for your big party.
That's what he said.
I asked Casey to write home when she moved away from home.
It's hard to leave your home town.
She's been here all of her life.
She's going away for college right?  Where is she going?
Casey is moving to Cambridge, Massachusetts. She got into Harvard.
She is so smart.
I finally got an actual letter today from Casey.
Haven't you guys been texting and emailing all the time since she moved.
Yeah, but I also asked her to write snail mail letters, so we could be pen pals like people used to do.
That's so cool, what did she say?
Says she misses us and our home town and even included some arcade tickets she found when she was unpacking.
Hey lets go to the arcade and use them, then we can mail her what ever we win with the tickets.
There's a new girl at school.
I don't remember seeing anyone new.
Her name is Casey, she was sitting by herself.
Did you say anything to her?
I walked over to say hi, we're friends now.
You're a good person, Sasha.
I walked over to this new girl Casey at school who sat by herself during lunch.
That's nice of you.
She looks timid but nice. I wanted to be her friend.
She'll be lucky to have a friend like you.
I know almost everyone at school. I'll make sure she makes some friends. It's hard to the new girl.
It's really is. I've moved a bunch of times, I know.
I met a new girl at school today.
Oh who is that?
Her name is Casey. She was sitting by herself and looked kind of sad. So I went over and talked to her.
That was cool of you. Is she nice?
Yeah she's really cool! She's from California.
Oh how cool! I can't wait to meet her.
I care about everyone in this kingdom, rich or poor!
Prove it to us!
I just signed a bill giving tax write-offs for the poor as well opportunities for well paying jobs.
But now you're going to take too much from the rich!
Not true. My plan does not involve taking any money from the rich. It benefits everyone in the kingdom.
We hope you are telling the truth!
I want everyone to be safe.
But the rich will reward you.
Yes, but there are so many poor to protect.
The poor don't deserve it.
Everyone deserves a safe kingdom.
I guess you are right.
What can I do for you?
How much for your protection?
I don't charge for that. I protect everyone in the kingdom, regardless of their wealth.
Then how do you earn a living?
You do not have to worry about that.
I feel less worry already.
Last night I prepared everything for a deep clean of the house this morning.
Did you get all of your supplies that you needed?
I went to the store and got bleach, cleaner, dish liquid, carpet cleaner, all the good stuff and then turned on some music.
How long did it take you to finish it?
Just a few hours.
That was because you prepared and had everything ready.
Oh man, I so want that game! It just came out last week!
I know, me too. This tv ad makes it look really fun. And its for the virtual reality headset!
You know we have to buy it, right? Want to split the cost? We can play together.
Sure! Don't get mad if I beat you though!
Yeah, you wish! Ok, let's go pick it up now!
Sure thing! I'll bring the car around.
I really love the design of this cross and I want to see where it was made.
I think that's from Mexico because I can see the engraving on the bottom of it.
I will just take a picture and reverse image search it on google and see if I can find the same one when I get home.
That's actually a really genius idea and will work great.
Ash and I should be dead but an angel saved us!
You saw an angel?.
Yes, it came down and saved us from the car wreck.
Wow that must've been incredible.
I tell you Ash and I saw an angel after that car crash. We both saw this glowing light and heard it speak.
Wow. I have heard of stuff like that. Are you sure?
We both saw it. Maybe it was the spirit of the 2 people who died in the other car? Or our guardian angel?
That is really amazing.
I feel so blessed to be alive. I know it was telling me something. Maybe to make my life better.
I invited my mom over for dinner.
I'm sure she's excited to see the new house.
I'm glad my husband and I decided to finally buy a house instead of renting.
It's definitely an investment. Once it's paid off you can retire. Not have to worry about a place to live.
I know. My mom is picky though so I hope she likes it.
I'm sure she will and it's not like she has to live in it.
My husband and I just got a new house together.
I'm really happy for you two, you guys deserve it.
Thanks, I've invited my mother over this weekend to come and check it out now that it's all decorated.
I am sure she will love it!
I hope so.
I hope you have a great weekend.
I always got criticized by how much I look after my daughter, but now I'm pretty glad about it.
Why, what happened that you are so happy about?
Well, she wasn't paying attention to where she was going half the time, so I started watching her closely.
And did something end up happening?
Yeah, she was wondering on the sidewalk and a car nearly hit her, but I saw it coming so I got her out of the way.
Oh, my goodness, thank God you were there and paying attention to her.
I had a scare the other day.  I was holding Ashley's hands while we were crossing the street and she dropped her toy and ran after it. She almost got hit by a car.
How scary. I am glad you were there to save her.
I just yanked her so quickly when I saw that car getting close.
Was it speeding?
It ran a red light. The police was right then and chased it until it stopped.
That sounds dramatic.
My daughter had a real close call at the park the other day.
What, did she fall off a swing or something?
No. She almost ran in the road and got hit by a car.
Wow. Who stopped her from running?
I'm glad I was keeping a close watch on her. I grabbed her and saved her from getting hit.
Wow. It's a good thing you were close and paying attention.
How was your day?
Not bad, you?
I almost died today by saving like 6 people from this fire.
Oh my god, dude you're a hero! Do you have injuries?
Very minor, I am just glad everyone is ok. Most intense day I've had with the Fire Department since I joined.
I'll say!
I am exhausted and depleted!
You must be after helping everyone in the fire.
I helped the fire fighters rescue victims from a burning building.
You sure did and with little regard for your own safety.
I was just being a good Samaritan.
You are an angel Alex.
One of my patients keeps forgetting to take his medicine on time.
That's not good, how can you help someone like that?
I've been calling him everyday to make sure he takes his medicine, I have noticed his health is improving too.
You're a great nurse, Taylor.
Why is everybody looking at me like I grew another head or something?
Are you kidding? Do you realize that was the first time you've ever spoken up in class?
It was? Hm, I guess you're right. I hadn't really thought about it.
Well, I would guess everyone's realizing there's more to you than meets the eye.
I'm just shy, that's all. Why, what did everyone think?
Everybody pretty much assumed you were a little slow.
I finally spoke up in class today and answered a question.
That's great, did you get the answer correct?
Yes, everyone seemed surprised though.
Maybe it's because you don't often speak up.
I think everyone thought I wasn't smart.
Well you've proven them wrong.
So people never thought I was smart.
How do you know that?
They told me.
That doesn't seem very nice.
Well, it's because I never talk during class. They told me now they see my wisdom.
People should not be so quick to judge.
I'm having so much fun playing this video game.
I think I hear your mom calling you for dinner.
I can't eat right now, we're in the middle of a game.
Your mom might get mad if you ignore her.
She won't mind if I'm a little late.
Ok, then let's finish this game.
My mother always calls me for dinner when I am right in the middle of a game.
What do you do?
I usually just keep playing until she brings my food up to me.
At least it doesn't get cold then.
My mom keeps calling me to go eat.
Well, I guess this is our last game.
Yes. For a while at least. She's getting mad I'm ignoring her calls.
Well, don't get in trouble. Last time she took the game away from you for 2 weeks.
I remember. I'm not even in the mood for dinner.
Well, just eat a little so due doesn't get mad.
I love playing this video game with you.
Isn't that your mom calling you for dinner?
I don't hear anything.
She's definitely calling, and she's getting upset.
I still can't hear anything.
Well, here she comes, and she looks pretty angry.
I was so angry at my parents I ran to my room and slammed the door. We were fighting again about my drinking.
It sounds like your parents are concerned. How much are you drinking?
Just a bottle of vodka a week. What do they care. They drink just as much.
Yeah, but you are only 20. Maybe they don't want you to become like them.
That's true. They are the last people I want to turn into.
I need a place to hide.
Why?
Jesse caught me cheating and is really upset.
Why do you need to hide though?
He set my house on fire, so I am staying out of his way.
Wow that is very extreme.
He is in jail.
You put him there.
I didn't start the fire, he did that on his own.
If you had never cheated, he would never have burned your house down.
You are taking his side, you are suppose to be my friend.
I am, but it is your fault too.
My poor house. The whole kitchen is destroyed because Jesse got mad at me and set it on fire.
Why in the world would he do such a thing?
He is upset because he found out that I have been cheating with his cousin for the last couple months.
He is insane. This is so crazy.
I hope he goes to prison for a long time for this.
He will. There is no way out of it. He will go to jail where he belongs.
I was invited out to dinner last weekend by a colleague.
Did you have a good time?
I didn't show up.
Why not?
I felt uncomfortable around them so I decided not to go.
If you don't feel comfortable around someone it might be best to let them know.
My co-worker invited to dinner tomorrow night.
Do you plan on going to dinner with them?
I don't think so, he is always making comments to me that make me uncomfortable.
Have you told him to stop making the comments, that they make you uncomfortable?
I am afraid that if I say anything, I will lose my job.
Would you like me to kick his ass?
I decided to do different tasks and alternate them to work more efficiently.
Did it work? Did you get them all done?
I actually did, it refreshed my mind to work on something different every half hour.
I need to try that, I feel like I get so bored with doing one job all day.
It really helped me get things done.
You need to show me how you do this so I can be more efficient as well.
I have to go get my blood tested tomorrow after school.
Are you nervous about that?
I was, but Alex made me feel better when I called her earlier.
That was nice of her. Do you want me to come with you to the test?
No, I'll be fine, but I might call you before or after.
OK, yeah, give me a call whenever if you need someone to talk to.
I really want to make people aware of the issue of drunk drivers.
I get it. After your mothers death.
It just made me really care more about this whole issue.
It's great that you are trying to use your tough times to enlighten others.
Thank you! I try. Easier said than done.
I get it, but you'll be successful.
I feel we should all do more to prevent drunk drivers from getting on the streets.
Its a huge problem, but if we work hard we can achieve awareness.
I agree I work hard everyday so that no one has to suffer a loss like mine.
What happened?
I lost my mom due to a drunk driving accident.
So sorry to hear I guess I get why you are so committed with the cause now.
I feel proud of myself for promoting awareness for drunk drivers.
It's just unfortunate that people think they can drink and drive.
I guess we need to teach them about it before it gets to that point unfortunately.
I think teaching kids responsibility is a great idea.
I had to create consumer awareness since my mother died from a drunk driver.
I heard you did and also made it nice.
Yes because only positive feelings will make people engage.
It's a good movement. I'm glad you did it.
We have to keep ourselves safe.
Yes it's important, really important.
I don't care what other kids think.
Well you shouldn't really.
They make fun of me for being different.
That's not very nice of them.
It won't make me change who I am though.
It shouldn't matter what others think of you.
I don't know why people keep making fun of me.
What are they doing?
They laugh at me whenever they see me and I don't know why.
Well Carson you are a bit different, but that is what makes you unique. Don't listen to the haters out there.
I know, it's just hard to ignore sometimes.
Look, I will always have your back okay? Don't worry.
I'm tired of people just being sheep.
What exactly do you mean by sheep?
People that can't make up their own mind and just follow what everybody else says and does.
OK, I understand now.
I am my own person and I make my own decisions that some people aren't going to lie, thus they call me names and treat me differently.
Well from my perspective, that's the thing I love about you the most.
Sorry I missed the hike yesterday.
Why didn't you come along?
My shoes are really worn out and uncomfortable.
Ah, that would've been miserable with bad shoes.
Yeah, I'm going to get new ones soon.
Great, maybe you can make it next time.
Would you like to go shopping with me so we can pick out new shoes with me?
Sure, I needed to pick up a new pair and this would be a great time hanging out.
I might pick up an extra pair because they have a buy one get one free sale.
I hope we can pick up a few good deals since I just got a new credit card.
Try not to spend too much so you can pay it off and not be in debt.
Man, we are going to be late for our hiking trip.
Why would you say that? We have plenty of time
These hiking boots are terrible. They are cutting into my feet and the heels wore out unevenly in the back.
Well, just deal with it. You're a pro. You should be able to hike in flip flops.
I can't. Let's just stop off at the sporting goods store to pick some new ones.
Okay, I may need to get some lipstick, rouge and eye shadow for the trip.
I really wanted to go hiking yesterday but my shoes don't fit the same way since my surgery.
I guess you're going to have to get all new shoes?
My sandals will still be okay, but my boots and dress shoes will need to be a size larger now.
I'm glad you got your foot operated on though, I know you're not in pain anymore.
Yeah. Having to buy new shoes is a small price to pay for being pain-free!
Isn't that the truth! We'll go hiking next weekend.
I can't believe Ash would have the audacity to make a snide remark about my clothing.
What did he say about your clothes?
He said it was too skimpy for winter. So I gave him a look.
I think he just has a crush on you.
How do you figure that?
He was looking closely at what you were wearing.
I didn't really like what Ash said about me today.
I heard he commented on your outfit?
Yeah he said it was outdated so I gave him a mean look.
Good, that sent the message that he should be nicer.
I hope he actually changes.
Me too, only time will tell.
Sydney seemed frustrated.
What was making her frustrated?
She failed an exam she had been preparing for.
That's unlucky, I bet she was angry.
I gave her a hug to calm her down and prevent her from being angry.
I am sure she appreciates the support.
Sometimes Jordan gets on my nerves.
Which one of his qualities gets on your nerves?
He's often in his own world and ignores what's going on around him including the people.
I have also noticed the same thing about Jordan.
I had to let him know that if this continues we won't be able to hang out anymore.
That's a tough stance but one that you have every right to take.
I am so embarrassed!
Oh no, what did you do now?
You haven't seen the video?
Video? No I haven't seen any video. What's on the video?
I went to the beach last night and partied with some boys. I went wild.
And this is on video? Wait until everyone at school hears about this. You might have to move!
I can't believe I got that drunk last night.
You were dancing on top of all the tables.
I have never acted like that in my life.
Don't be embarrassed, you are in college it happens all the time.
I was always a good kid though.
Having fun doesn't make you a bad person.
You know how I'm always talking about sports, right?
Yeah, especially soccer. You love that stuff.
I finally put down a bet on one of the big soccer games.
No way! How did it go?
I managed to convince some other people to go in on the bet too since they trusted my judgment, and we all won big.
I made a bet on the soccer game.
Are you sure about this game?
Definitely. A few other people bet on it too because they trust me.
How many others?
A lot. Why do you keep asking?
Because I just bet on the other team before I heard you bet.
I have a lot of confidence in this team. They're unstoppable.
Seems like it. They're definitely on a streak.
You know, I could win several thousand dollars here if all goes well.
Wow, I didn't realize you bet that much.
I wasn't planning to, but when I crunched the numbers, it seemed like a safe bet.
Can you imagine if you win, you'll be rich.
It has been a rough weekend for me!
What do you mean? What did you do this weekend that was so rough?
My friend Tracy was moving this weekend and her moving crew backed out, so I volunteered to help.
That was nice of you, but I guess I understand now why you are so tired.
Tired and sore is more like it, but I enjoy helping friends out.
At least I know who to call the next time I need some help!
I was very busy all day yesterday
What were you doing?
I rented a truck and helped Tracy.
What did Tracy need a truck for?
She's moving and doesn't need her furniture right now so we put it all into storage
You are a great friend to Tracy!
I just got back from walking Kendall's dog.
Why would you have to walk Kendall's dog?
They went to work event and wouldn't make it back in time for the dog to use the bathroom.
That was nice of you to do the favour for them.
Yeah, nice. I do not like dogs.
Then it was a huge favour for you to walk the dog.
Come on, sweet puppy!
You must really like dogs.
I do! Kendall's dog is awesome, and deserves to go on walks.
Cool, can I walk with you guys?
Sure.
Thanks.
I am really enjoying going on this dog walk.
I didn't realise you had a dog!
I wish! It's not mine, I am doing a favour for an old friend, Kendall.
Well this is good practice if you ever decide to get a dog of your own.
That is very true, I do really want one.
Maybe we should visit the shelter this weekend and have a look.
Kendall has been down for a while so I figured I would go see if I could help her out.
I can't believe she has been sick for so long. Does she seem any better?
She's getting stronger. I offered to walk the dog since she can't really get around much yet.
I bet he was glad to have some exercise! Her dog is so cute!
He was really excited. I know Kendall wants the best for him. I remember when he was just a puppy.
He's like her baby for sure.
I had a big fright walking home the other night.
Is everything okay, what happened?
I was walking home after work and I thought I felt someone touch my shoulder so I kept turning back to look, but there was nobody there.
That is very spooky, I wonder what it was.
I realised once I got home that it was just the wind blowing my hair!
That is a big relief!
Did you see that person touch me? That guy with the moustache?
Yeah, I did. What was that all about?
He said he thought I was somebody else. He seemed pretty embarrassed.
He should be. It's kind of dumb to go around touching strangers.
It was an honest mistake. I felt kind of bad for him.
Well, he probably won't go around touching people any more.
I just spilled soda all over me.
How did that happen Taylor?
Chuck made me laugh right when I put the glass to me lips.
Silly chuck is always doing stuff like that.
He really is, isn't he?
It was so embarrassing!
What happened?
I was at the party last night. I laughed after I drank some soda and it came out my nose.
That does sound embarrassing.
Have you been on Facebook recently?
No I haven't why?
Remember the picture I took of you with the President?
Yes and I'm still waiting for you to print it.
Well I did print it for you and I also posted it on Facebook for everyone to see.
Wow that's cool! Thanks!
So I went to Kylie's house to help out with the party, and she hadn't even started preparing for it.
What time did you get there?
Like two hours before it was supposed to start! So being the good sister that I am I got everything ready for her, and just in the nick of time too.
She's so lazy sometimes.
I swear sometimes I think I'm adopted. I'm not like anyone else in my family. Anyways it turned out fine. We had a lot of fun.
You are the party whisperer, everyone says so!
I arrived at the party so early to help out!
How is the preparation for the party?
Very good! I helped the party get started!
That sounds fun!
I'm excited.
Why?
I came early to get the party setup and help everyone out. I love parties.
I'm a fan of parties too.
Yeah, it's fun.
I made a really big map for all of the kids.
Oh are you going into slave trade again?
Yes, and it is important that they know what they are learning isn't a cookie cutter version of history.
I think the way you teach is really admirable, did they like the maps.
They said it was really pretty.
My students have been struggling with geography and orienteering and stuff, but I came up with a solution.
Orienteering? You mean like map reading and directional stuff?
Exactly. More on the geography front. Anyway, I decided to make my own map of our town from scratch. They were shocked!
Did you really go through all that trouble?
Yeah. I didn't want to give them any excuse of boredom or indifference. They were so impressed and looked at it all period!
Maybe you've found a new skill!
I wanted to be a cartologist.
You wanted to be a cartoonist?
No silly, a map maker.
Why bring that subject up at this time?
I wrote a map and gave it to my students in the class to look at and they thought it was very professional.
What do kids know?
Remy's death hit me hard, I'm remembering all the good times.
Yeah he was such a great person.
Gone too soon but not from my heart.
I will always remember the bonfire.
That was such a high point my life.
I miss him too.
I can't believe he is dead.
Have you talked to Remy's parents yet?
No I haven't been able to muster up the strength to call them.
Yeah, I know how that feeling. He was always such a nice guy.
He really was, and funny, I just didn't know he was into drugs.
I know, it is so sad.
I had so much fun annoying everyone all of last night.
I know that you enjoy annoying them to get back at what they did to you.
I was as loud as a I could be and belligerent to them.
What your parents did, by making you end your relationship with him was wrong.
My mom said I gave them a headache.
Did they have to take headache medicine this morning?
Do you remember me telling you about our team being in charge of the upcoming charity event?
Yes, you said that Jordan wasn't really getting any good ideas and you were afraid to share yours.
Well, when we took a break I talked to Jordan about the idea I had for a night at the races.
Did she like the idea?
She loved it so much that she shared it with the team and they all agreed to try it.
I think it's a great idea and I am so happy you took a risk and talked to Jordan.
Jordan gave the team my idea because they couldn't come up with something.
Did he ask you first?
No, I wasn't at work yesterday when they had the meeting. I think he gave me credit though.
That's good. You should get credit for your good ideas.
I have heard about many managers who steal other people's ideas.
People will do anything to get ahead.
I just got a new haircut at the salon. What do you think?
I like it. Short hair really looks good on you.
Yeah, I thought it was getting too long and wanted something cooler for summer.
It's also probably easier to care for too.
Yeah it's going to free up more time for watching movies.
I went to get my hair cut today if you can't tell.
Wow man you had hair down to your shoulders.
Yeah I wanted it to be really short again.
How long was it before?
It was like 10 inches long and this is almost like a buzzcut.
You should have just got a mullet that would be cool.
I had to take my daughter to the doctor this morning.
Why? Is she sick?
No. School's getting ready to start. I had to take her immunization forms to see if she needed any booster shots.
The kids need an awful lot of shots to get into school.
She hates shots and throws a fit, but luckily she's up-to-date.
I need to take my son in to see what he needs for school. I better set up an appointment.
I went to talk to Skylar at her office about some new insurance policies.
Really? How did that go? Did you buy any new policies?
Well, there was so much that I wasn't aware of, I spent about 2 hours just asking about insurance and learning new things.
Wow, two hours? You must have been really interested.
I really was, I spent so long there, I never made it to my therapy appointment.
Well, at least you found something that you are actually really interested in, and it's never a bad thing to discover something that you want to learn more about!
I needed to know how much of these therapy sessions the insurance company is covering for Skylar.
They should have been able to tell you that when you showed up at the appointment.
They hadn't even run it though. They told me I would be billed afterwards by mail.
That doesn't sound right. You should have been able to go in there and pay the company.
It was a one hour appointment. I spent the whole hour arguing with the therapist's office staff. Skylar didn't even get into that appointment.
What's bad is that your insurance company will still get billed for that hour? You will have to pay the balance of what they don't pay.
I hated it when the clone bit me.
Oh no! What did you do?
Well, I bit him back. That'll teach him.
Well, as long as the lesson was learned.
I hear you. I got him this time.
Yes, you sure did.
My evil clone in this new game I got is really scary.
What happened in the game?
The clone turned evil and bit my character.
That is terrifying, how did you react?
My character had a bite move too, so I bit the clone back.
Wow, that sounds exciting too.
You should probably be thanking me. Well, the whole world should be thanking me.
Why should the whole world be thanking you?
Because last night I was abducted by space aliens and they asked me what Earth was like, so I told them.
And what did they think?
They thought it wasn't worth saving but I promised we would try to do better. We have 3 years to get our act together.
This is information that we should probably share with people more important than us.
There needs to be more peace here.
What do you mean?
I went to space and met aliens, and decided this place needs more peace.
You mean earth?
Yes
What are you talking about?
Hey everyone, I am getting a surprise party ready for Kyle. I sent this message to everyone.
That is a great idea! What can I bring?
Maybe paper towels and soda.
You got it!
It should be a great time everyone!
Are you going to be able to come to the surprise party?
Wouldn't miss it! Is there anything I can help with?
Yes, thanks for offering. I have a list of things I still need to get done. You can pick from that or contact everyone.
I can contact everyone first and then pick.
I would really appreciate that so much.
It was an interesting day at the shop today, again!
What is going on with that?
I have to keep reminding people of the elevated step when they are coming in, it gets tedious.
But it keeps everyone safe, right.
Sometimes, I had to stop a guy today and specifically point out the step and he still stumbled!
Wow, maybe someone can remove that step.
Man, this girl is amazing.
So I've heard. Did you really write a song for her?
Of course, man. She deserves it. She's my shining star man.
Hah, well she liked it I guess?
Oh yeah, man, she gave me a kiss on the lips.
That's good Jesse. I'm glad she liked it.
Man! my throat hurts.
What's up with it. Are you feeling sick?
No buddy, I sang to my girlfriend the song I had written especially for her over dinner yesterday.
Dude! You can't sing your voice is horrible.
I know right.
Yeah well, I hope she went with it.
I was so nervous on mine and Mindy's date last night!
Why, you have been out with her several times now?
Well I wrote a song for her and I sung it to her, talk about nerve wrecking.
Oh wow, I would be nervous to! How did it go, did she like it?
She said she did, but seriously I think she really liked it, she got a little emotional.
You are so sweet, I am sure you made her feel very special!
I want to have a lot of fun today
Right, I feel that. Where are you going to shoot your load?
Probably into the sky. This is the best option.
You're right. It is a big sky.
it really is. Thanks for helping me decide
Yeah for sure.
We were at the shooting range last night.
That sounds fun.
We fired shots the whole time and it felt so good.
I know, you have not done that in a long time.
I fired the last shots till my gun was empty.
I am so glad for you.
I wanted to have the maximum amount of fun possible.
How did you accomplish that?
I shot the load toward the sky.
Sounds like a lot of fun! I really wish I was there.
I just prayed that I won't get an upset stomach. It was slightly spoiled but I drank it anyways.
Were you alright?
I made it through the night. I think I am fine.
I drink recently expired milk sometimes, especially when there's no other milk in the house.
That was my last cup of milk and I was craving it. It paired well with my brownie.
Those two do go together.
Do you know if this milk is still good?
I think it is, but there is a chance it is lightly spoiled.
Nasty, it is a little bit spoiled.
Then why're you still drinking it?
Because we have no other milk.
Yesterday I accidentally drank spoiled milk.
Gross. Are you feeling okay?
I'm feeling a little sick actually.
At least you have today off from work.
Yes, I think I'll go lie down.
I hope you feel better soon.
I had to pay Riley for her services using a check.
How come you used a check?
I didn't have any cash on me.
Did Riley cash in the check?
Yes, she cashed it in straight after leaving, I noticed the money leave my account that evening.
I hope it was worth it.
I recently had to have Riley come do some yard work for me and she did a nice job.
Yes, she does good work.
I felt kind of bad because I had no cash so I had to give her a check.
I am sure she didn't mind, assuming you didn't write a bad check!
No of course not!
I am sure she was just happy to earn some money and make you happy.
I had to pay Riley by check for her help.
What did Riley do for you?
She helped with some garden work I had been putting off.
How much did you pay her?
Well the work took a few days, so in the end I paid her $200, I didn't have it in cash so that's why I paid her using a check.
Money is money, I am sure she was greatful.
Riley needs to cash the check I gave her, can you remind her?
Of course, I will make sure she buys something good.
Just make sure the check doesn't expire before she cashes it in.
Will do, I know she needs to buy some things in town, so we will visit the bank while we are there.
That sounds good.
See you later.
I feel like a million bucks but I have to stay in bed with the flu.
I overheard Jesse saying that you were sick!
It's because Jesse didn't want to go to Remy's lame knitting party so I am pretending to be sick to get us out of it.
Oh, those are dull then they always break out in a bridge game.
Exactly, that's why we are pretending to have the flu.
You should just say you don't want to go instead of lying.
Do you like the meat that I made?
Oh definitely, it's so good!
Thanks, I am glad.
Where did you get it from again?
I actually bought it at the gas station, but I had picked up the French bread from the grocery store.
That is interesting, but not sure how I feel about eating gas station meat.
I've made a very questionable decision.
What'd you do?
I bought meat from a gas station, and bread from a supermarket.
Gas station meat?
Yes, if I don't see you tomorrow you know why.
Good luck with that.
I was at the gas station so I bought the meat there, but I had to go to the supermarket to buy the bread.
I do that sometimes, especially now that the stores can't seem to keep food in stock.
Not the food you want. I've been looking for eggs for my homemade cake. I still haven't found any.
I have an extra carton that I can give you.
That's would be great.
I can bring it over when I come over for game night.
While we're here, let me get some meat and bread.
You're getting meat at a gas station?
They have a convenience store.
Well, hurry it up.
Got the meat, now I have to go to the supermarket to get the bread, there wasn't any here.
A convenience store has meat, but not bread. That makes sense.
This meat at the gas station is really tasty.
They sell meat at the gas station?
Yeah, I was surprised by it, but it is really good.
Do they sell other good things?
Their bread is bad, I buy that at the supermarket.
Okay, bread at the supermarket makes sense.
Jan played me an amazing speech earlier.
That sounds exciting, what speech was it?.
I'm not sure, but the title of the video was the best speech in history.
Did it live up to its title then?
It did! It has also made me realise that I love hearing speeches.
That was really nice of Jan.
Jan played this really great speech and I could not stop thinking about it.
Oh really I never took you for someone that enjoyed stuff like that.
Neither did I but it made me realize I love hearing speeches.
That is so great, you have a passion!
I plan to find a lot more and really get into them.
It is always great to do something like that you love.
Did you hear what Jan just played?
It sounded like it was an amazing speech!
I thought that was one that I have heard before. It was really good.
Do you enjoy listening to speeches?
Yes, I do enjoy some of the greatest ones.
I'm glad that you do. I really like them as well.
I just love listening to amazing people speak.
It's definitely a gift that some people have and most don't.
The eloquence that some of these people speak what is just amazing.
Smart people just sound good when they're up in front of a microphone talking.
Not all of them, because we've seen and heard plenty that sound otherwise.
You're right about that.
I just woke up.
Wow, it's four in the afternoon!
Yeah I work the night shift now so I have to sleep during the day.
Wow that's got to be hard.
It takes some getting used to, that's for sure. I get home around eight in the morning and usually sleep until three or four.
I'm not sure I'd be able to do that. I need total darkness to sleep.
I going to bed now.
What time are you going to work? It's already morning yet your going to sleep?
My shift starts at night and so I spent all afternoon sleeping.
That's really tough.
I make night into day, and day into night.
I wish I could do that too.
I get so tired working night shift.
Do you ever stay up for the day?
No, I go home in the morning and sleep all afternoon.
Don't you feel like you waste the day?
No, I have to sleep to get ready for the next night shift.
Oh yeah, I guess you would have to sleep in the morning,
I asked Carson if he could bring his kids over for a visit. We could have family time and get to know each other.
How old are Carson's kids?
He has two kids. They are three and five.
That's such a fun time. They are at that perfect age. They can talk and have endless energy.
I've only hung out with them twice. They are a bundle of joy.
Hope you get to spend more time with them soon.
I think you will like these clothes that I saw at the mall today with my mom.
Do you think they will have my size available?
I think so. They usually have all sizes available for everyone and they are stretchy too.
I think I gained a little weight this winter so I have been sceptical of trying new clothes on.
I am sure you will be fine.
I'm getting ready to go to the mall with my mom.
That sounds like a fun day retail therapy is always nice.
My mom and I are going to buy some new clothes for a party.
Oh what types of outfits do you have in mind?
It's going to be a theme party for the Great Gatsby so we're going to get some flapper type of outfits
You should look for some vintage pieces to sell the look.
I played the slots again last weekend.
Did you win any money?
I lost every coin I placed into the machine.
I thought those were just to serve as some kind of appetizer for the bigger table games.
I can never stand the pressure at the table games.
Yeah, it's because everyone's watching you.
I love going to casinos. I went to one last night.
Did you win anything?
I won one small jackpot but I put it all back in. As usual.
I never come home ahead. But it's fun to be there.
I agree. I had a nice night out and free drinks.
Let's play slots as usual.
Put your coins inside.
Oh, I won.
Let me try.
Oh, you won also.
Let's go before we lose it all.
It's too hot out here man.
Yeah its really hot today.
I'm done running for now.
Smart idea.
Remember the other day when it was so hot outside?
Yes. Wasn't that the day you ran away?
Yes, it was so hot and I ran for so long that I thought I was going to have a heatstroke and die.
That's dangerous! What did you do?
I had to cool off so I jumped in the pool at the park. I took my shoes off so I could make sure my heels got cool.
That was good thinking. Hot heels always suck.
Thanks for coming out to eat with me.
I'm hungry too.
Well, I won't be having vegetables.
No surprise there.
Yes, I will go for the fries.
Another day, another healthful meal.
Hi, is the chicken served with just vegetables?
No, you can add anything you like to it.
Okay, aside from vegetables, what do you have?
We have fries and rice.
I'll have the fries instead.
Coming right up.
Vegetables are gross!
Momma says they help you stay healthy, but they do taste nasty.
We went out and I ordered me some fries.
The crinkle cut kind are the best.
It certainly is tough being the manager at the bank.
Was the place robbed?
No, but I need to fire some employees, including Kai, and he is well liked.
Have you started the process?
I've decided to talk to Kai, give him a letter of recommendation and a severance package.
I wish you were my manager.
The bank is really putting pressure on me to cut expenses.
What kind of expenses?
They want me to fire some employees.
Who's getting fired?
Some low performers and Kai, Kai is the newest employee but he's well liked. So I'll talk to him to ease the blow.
Hopefully Kai can get another job.
I'm having the feeling to fire some employees.
I hope Kai isn't among the people getting let go.
Sadly Kai is.
Oh, you know she's well liked.
Yeah, but I've decided to talk to her.
That's better.
Alex needs to straighten up.
How can he do that Quinn?
His posture is bent, I need to talk to him about it before he gets hurt.
I think you might turn his life around with advice like that.
Do you need help painting your house?
Yes I do. Can you help me?
Indeed. Do you have any idea for what background you would like designed?
No, that's the hardest part.
I can help you. I'll paint a mural depicting mountains in the background. It would look great.
That would look amazing. Thanks.
How do you like this mural painting?
I think it's wonderful.
I actually painted it.
You painted all of this? I didn't even know you can do that.
Yeah, I wanted a painting of a landscape with mountains and a beautiful sunset in the background.
You should do something like this for my house.
I'm almost finished with my mural.
How's it coming out?
Really nice actually. I drew some mountains at sunset.
I can't wait to see it.
It'll be ready for my home warming.
I'm sure it will be beautiful.
My neighbour climbed a ladder to try to do some work on his gutters.
Did he complete the job?
He slipped and took a big fall to the ground.
Oh no. I'm sorry to hear that.
I called an ambulance. The ambulance arrived swiftly.
I hope that your neighbour gets well soon.
I had a big scare this morning! I was sitting at my porch when I saw my neighbour fall off his ladder.
Oh no! Was he hurt? What did you do?
I am not sure. I called for an ambulance from my cell phone.
He is pretty old already, right? I hope he didn't break any bones.
I'm actually here in the hospital, because I offered to drive his wife here. She is pretty frantic.
That is so nice of you. I'm sure they appreciate all the help you're giving them.
I've just seen my neighbour fall down from the ladder from the second story.
Oh my god maybe you should run over there and help them.
I think they are really hurt.
Call the ambulance then and get them help right away.
That's a good decision.
Austin needs to stop drinking all the time and causing this trouble.
I know, he is getting out of hand.
When he got back last night I read him the riot act.
Do you think he will listen this time?
I really hope so.
Me too.
Austin came home at 5 am smelling like whiskey last night.
Where was he?
He was out with his friends, when he got back home he woke me up.
What did you do?
I came down and read him the riot act!
Hopefully he won't do that again.
I am sick of bullies.
Did something happen at school?
Some kids were picking on Jordan.
Did you do anything about it?
I stood up to the bullies as Jordan looked back up at me.
You are his hero.
I got tired of those bullies that were messing with Jordan.
It's so sad that kids can be so mean for no reason.
Our world is very cool at this moment in time.
It seems like it has been a gradual change to get us to where we are right now.
Doesn't help that we have a bully in the White House.
Oh yeah, such a great example for our youth.
I was really trying to make sure I didn't eat any junk food.
Just one time won't hurt you and it's just a little bit.
Yes, but I'm on a very strict diet.
You can cheat just today, it won't be the end of the world.
But I am very proud of myself so far for not going off my diet, I even resisted Riley trying to lead me astray.
It's going to be fine, consider it a celebration.
Riley is always buying me cake and chocolates.
What's wrong with that? That sounds good to me.
I'm dieting. I need to lose 10 pounds.
No you don't. Maybe Riley likes you the way you are.
I'm not happy with myself. It doesn't matter what he thinks.
Just try to exercise so you burn more calories. You can also freeze some of the cakes and chocolate and take a little at a time.
This is frustrating.
What's that?
The boy next door was supposed to rake all the leaves and now look at the lawn.
I see lots of leaves, but maybe they fell last night.
No, the trees were bare.
I guess you need to find a different person to rake your lawn.
I can't believe the yard work wasn't finished
What did they not finish?
There were a bunch of leaves left in the yard
I'm really sorry to hear that. Maybe they can finish the job tomorrow?
That's a great idea! I'll give them a call tonight
Sounds great. I'm sure everything will be great
I took care of Victor.
What do you mean?
Well, he has been taunting me about how he'd beat me in the race, and I said lay off or be sorry.
And what happened?
He kept bad mouthing me, so I tripped him and he sprained his ankle.
You've got to be kidding.
I'm happy the Kai family is here in America.
Have you been spending time with them?
I spend everyday with them.
You don't get bored?
No, I know I'll miss them when they leave.
It's good that you enjoy their company.
I really love spending time with Kai's family.
I hope they have given you a nice little taste of America.
They have been the best host family a boy could hope for.
Wow, do you really mean that?
Of course I do, that's why I said it!
I was the one that found grandma's body.
I am so sorry, you had to be the one to find her?
I was worried, she was not answering her phone, so I went to the house and saw her through the window, laying in the floor.
You saved your sister's from having to see her like that, by being the one to find her.
I had a problem with the printer today.
Did you manage to fix it?
It was just a problem with a paper jam. I had to stop the press.
That printer seems to be acting up recently.
Yeah, but I don't feel like I need to replace it.
Maybe it's just problems that occurred successively by random chance and not a systematic breakdown.
Sorry I'm late, I ran into some trouble in the copy room.
No worries. What happened?
The press got jammed. I swear, this happens at least once a week.
I know, it's super annoying. Did you fix it?
Yeah, but I had to take apart the machine to get the paper out.
Oh wow, that's no fun.
Casey was resting on the bed so I laid down next to him.
Where were you guys?
We were at his family's cabin in the mountains. We drove up to take a break from city life.
It must be nice up there.
It's spring now so everything is blooming. It's so green and wildflowers are everywhere.
You are lucky to get away.
Casey, was asleep in the bedroom earlier.
Was she tired?
Yes, the long journey really exhausted her.
I hope she got some sleep.
She did, I joined her too, I was knackered.
I'm glad you guys got some time to rest.
It was so nice just to chill with Casey in bed.
That must've been relaxing.
It was, especially after our busy day.
What did you get up to?
We went for a long hike through the forest, it was great fun but exhuasting.
I bet it was!
I can't believe what happened in my neighbourhood the other night.
I hope nothing too bad?
Well some kids were protesting and were almost arrested.
Did they do anything wrong?
No, not at all. I had to step in to stop it.
Well I'm glad you decided to step in and help.
There was a police car down my street last night.
Was there an accident?
No, some kids were protesting police brutality and almost got arrested.
That sounds awful, did they end up getting arrested?
No, I used my influence as an retired police officer to prevent it.
Those officers can't arrest these kids!
Why not they are protesters and it is against the law to protest on a main road like this?
Well, they have constitutional rights to protests. It's their country.
That is true actually, you should go and inform those police officers.
I have, I am hoping my influence will prevent them from being arrested.
Good luck with that.
Oh it hurts! My ankle!
That was a bad fall! You know, I think your new shoes are too slippery.
I love these shoes.
They're nice, just maybe not for hopscotch.
I suppose. Maybe I'm just too old for schoolyard games at this point.
Games are for all ages. Don't do that to yourself.
Ouch! I think I twisted my ankle!
Oh no! Does it hurt badly? Can you move it?
Not really, it hurts when I try to put weight on it.
Okay, stay right there and don't move, let me go get the teacher.
Okay thank you, but please hurry.
I will, don't move! I'll be right back.
I don't think I'm going to be able to put any weight on this leg for months.
What happened? Your foot is all swollen.
I was playing hopscotch at the schoolyard and injured myself. I landed on the foot the wrong way and twisted the ankle.
At least nothing's broken.
I sprained my ankle yesterday.
I can see you're limping, what happened?
I was playing hopscotch in the playground after school and caught the edge of my shoe.
Ouch, how does it feel?
It still hurts and what's worse as much as I like to play, now I can't.
You'll just have to give it time.
I came in first place in the dance competition.
That's great! Congratulations.
I worked really hard and rehearsed a lot for it.
How do you feel?
I feel proud of myself.
You should.
Remember the dance competition I entered into for this weekend.
Yeah, the Modern Dance Competition at the local college.
Yes that is the one, I won first place for my age group.
Hey that's terrific, congratulations. I bet it was tough.
It was, there were a lot of dancers, but I've been practicing and I am so proud it all that work paid off.
You should be proud, winning first place is a big deal.
Whew I am so glad that it over with.
What are you talking about?
I just got done with a dance competition where I won first place. I am very proud that I won. Do you want to see my trophy?
Sure. I'm so happy for you.
I am going to place the trophy on my mantle so that everyone can see it.
That's a good place for it Ash.
I am so happy that I won the dance competition Saturday, I was so happy when they called my name!
I bet you were, you worked so hard for that title.
I sure did, I have really never felt prouder than I did at that moment.
Yay! You deserve that feeling, you did a great job!
It was worth the blood, sweat, and tears for sure.
Congratulations!
You'll never guess what. I won first place at a dance competition.
Wow. That's awesome.
Yes, I was really proud of myself. Even though I had that injury a couple of weeks ago, I still won.
You should be proud. Did you win a trophy?
A really big one. It will go right on the bookshelf.
That's a good place for it. It will remind you of how your hard work paid off.
That was wild. I never imagined in my life that I'd ever have the cops at my house.
Is everyone okay? Was there any damage?
Well, yeah! Windows were broken and some other damage to the house was done.
I saw the cops take away the man you had over earlier.
It was him. I can't believe what he did and the cops learned about it from our neighbour who I had talked to earlier in the day.
I hope everything is okay.
Some whacky neighbour was messing around with some explosives in their basement. The whole neighbourhood shook and I told the police that I suspect it was the dude next door.
Damn, that's crazy. Was there any damage to your house?
No, but it woke me up out of a sound sleep! I was so angry!
Well, do you have lots of shady people like that in your neighbourhood? Maybe you should move.
I don't really talk to many of my other neighbours, that guy seemed kind of off though.
Glad everyone is okay. Explosives are no joke! You never know these days, your neighbour also might have automatic weapons and have intent to use them!
I hope Jan still thinks about me.
I am sure she is missing you like crazy!
I has been ages since we last saw each other, keeping up this long distance relationship is tough but it will be worth it.
When will you two see each other again?
I get to see Jan again next month, I can't wait.
You must both be very excited.
Jan won't stop texting me about how she misses me.
I thought you guys broke up a while ago?
We did. But she still hasn't gotten over it.
That's sad to hear.
She keeps telling me how images of me comes to her mind.
Maybe she should go see a psychiatrist or something.
I hope you guys liked where I made your dinner reservation tonight.
Yes it was awesome, the food and service was great.
Did you guys like each other?
We had very easy going conversations and I felt like I knew him already.
Did he ask you out on another date?
Yes he did, we are going to see a movie next weekend.
I set up a co-worker and a friend on a date and they had a great time.
Oh wow. A successful Matchmaker huh?
It's my second match to be successful.
Are you going to keep setting people up?
Why not? This couple was very grateful, they said so.
Then you probably should keep setting people up.
Would you like to go for a ride now that Ash's car is fixed?
So he finally got his car fixed?
Yes, I got it fixed for him since he was broke.
That is awesome, he is lucky to have you as a friend.
I try but really it worked out for me too since we basically share the car.
That is true, let's go for that ride.
What happened to Ash's car?
It broke down. I think that it is in need of a new battery.
I know a place that can install a battery today.
I think Ash is struggling with money to pay for the battery.
Tell Ash not to worry. I will pay for it. Ash can pay me back later.
Wow that is very generous of you.
I had to pay to get Ash's car fixed.
Why didn't he pay it himself.
He didn't have any money.
He really needs to get a job.
I know. I'm sick of it.
He's just too lazy. You deserve better.
You know Ash who I went to college with?
Yeah, nice guy, seems down on his luck lately.
Yeah, he's having a rough time, and his car just broke down.
That's tough, hard to go to job interviews with no car.
I know, and he has no money right now, so I paid to get his car fixed.
You're a good person for doing that, Ash is lucky to have you for a friend.
Wow, I feel so guilty. I think these mice are sick.
Well they are lab rats. Don't worry about it.
I feel bad giving them this old cheese but Skylar is making me do it. It's going to kill them.
Well, just take notes, its part of your project.
Okay, I prefer the nuclear tests at Dexter's Laboratory.
I hear. You can development giant mice in his lab.
There are a lot of pieces of information I have in regards to the perpetrator.
There are so many questions I have to ask you about the situation.
There are a lot I can answer. I know everything about that persons hair colour, their height and what they look like.
I will most definitely need your help in regards to catching the criminal.
I am all here and you have my full attention.
That's good to know.
You know I was a witness to a crime.
What happened with that?
I was questioned by the FBI.
You're kidding, how was that?
Two people grilled me in a small room for about an hour.
Sounds like they thought you were the perp.
I was nervous in the interrogation room.
You did well though.
I hope I answered all of the questions the FBI had for me.
As long as you told everything you knew, there will be no problem.
I sure did.
You have nothing to worry about then.
Being in the kitchen always makes me hungry!
Me too! Want a sandwich?
Yes, I need Jordan to grab the butter, bread, cheese, and a frying pan and I'll whip us up a grilled cheese sandwich!
That sounds amazing! I am grateful that one of us here knows how to cook!
Right, you guys would starve without me.
I would be at McDonalds every day!
It was actually nice to get some help from Jordan in the kitchen.
What did he help you cook?
He didn't really help me cook. I just asked him to fetch the butter, bread, cheese, and a frying pan.
What did he do the rest of the time?
Eating after I finished cooking.
If that's the case, I'll help you in the kitchen next time.
That manual was a chore to go through.
Did you have trouble understanding it?
Yes, but I tried to follow all the steps exactly.
How were the results, then?
I was able to assemble the furniture just fine.
Good, hope nothing breaks in the upcoming weeks.
I am having trouble putting together this table set.
What is so difficult about it?
I'm not sure, but I know that I'm following the directions.
What is going on then? Just having trouble following through?
Yea, I am following everything, but can't seem to work it out.
Oh no! I'm confident that you'll be able to put it together though.
You should have seen his face when I gave him the car keys.
I'll bet it was amazing. What a 16th birthday present.
He's a good kid, so I felt happy to do it.
Now you won't have to drive him too all his activities either.
Yes, I'm pretty excited about that, too.
I brought my son a cool present.
What did you get him?
A brand new car for his birthday.
That is really cool man.
Thanks.
So you know it was my sons 16th birthday last week right?
Oh yeah that's right! How did it go?
It went amazing! We had the best surprise for him!
How fun! What was the surprise?
We got him a new car!
Oh that's so exciting! I bet he was thrilled!
I just bought my son a new car for his sweet sixteenth birthday.
Oh really, what kind?
I bought him a new Kia Optima. I thought that would be a nice starter car.
That's great. Have you showed him yet?
No, its going to be a surprise.
Well I hope he is happy with it.
Did you end up going to that party last night?
No, I ended up going out with my boyfriend to a nice dinner.
Oh, I ended up going to it with my friends, they were really excited to go.
Weren't you?
Not really I was tired, but I had ignored them all week cause work was so busy so I knew they would appreciate me coming along to it.
You're a good friend for going, I bet they were happy you were there.
I'm really sorry I was so busy this week. I feel like I ignored you guys.
Well, we sort of understood, but I'm glad you realized it.
I was just so stressed about the new project.
I understand, but you may want to talk to the others a bit more.
I will. I will apologize, too. I will try not to get so caught up in the projects.
Good idea. Maybe we could help.
I ignored my friends all week because I was super busy and can't be distracted. I went to a party and saw them this weekend.
Were they mad at you?
Initially but after I told them I was just too busy it's not like I don't like them, they were fine.
They understand you are under a lot of pressure at work.
I work very closely with the CEO, so that's added pressure.
You can't slack off.
I just got back from my 1st date with a girl I found on Tinder.
The girl you've been messaging throughout the week?
Yes, I finally met her and it went better than expected.
Mind sharing the details with me?
We went to the movies to watch a romance film and later went on to a fancy dinner place. We both had a wonderful time.
That's great news. I am glad things went well and you're likely going to get a second date.
I took my partner to a movie date.
So what happened Robin? Please tell me.
Well after our movie date, we ate dinner and we really had a great time.
Really? That's so nice to hear.
Yes, I hope you find a date too.
I hope so.
We ended up going to the movies for our first date.
Did you let her pick the movie? Girls like that.
We picked it out together, after the movie, we went to dinner.
Have you asked her on a second date?
I had a great time with my date.
Did you do anything interesting?
Just usual date stuff, we went to the movies then had dinner.
Did your date have a fun time too?
They said they did.
You should set up another date.
How did you do on the math test yesterday?
Pretty good, I got an A minus.
I did pretty bad, I got a B minus.
That's not so bad, did you do the bonus question?
I did and got it wrong, and I studied hard too, I really needed to get an A on this exam to pull my grade up.
Don't worry, I'll help you study for the next exam so you do better.
I can't believe Bailey took my girlfriend out to dinner.
I want to say I can't believe it but then I'd be lying.
Why would you be lying?
Because I wouldn't be telling the truth.
Little white lies are bad too though.
They can lead to bad things.
I am so mad at Bailey.
What happened?
He took out my girlfriend and never let me know.
Was she your girlfriend at the time?
No, it was a little before we started dating.
Well then you shouldn't be mad.
Today was amazing
Why? What happened?
Quinn took me outside and surprised me with a party, everyone was there and the cake was so good!
Quinn is always surprising people!
Yeah, she's such a great friend, she planned it all herself. We should return the favour for her birthday!
I'm down for it, she deserves it more than anyone!
I'm going to call Quinn tonight.
Why do you need to talk to her so much? I saw the two of you whispering all afternoon together.
I had to pull her aside to talk about the surprise party we're planning together for a mutual friend.
What kind of party is it?
It's a birthday party for our college roommate. You'd be welcome to attend, of course.
Well, it's kind of you to have extended the invitation.
Hey I just got of a business meeting. How are you.
Good. How did the meeting go?
It was good. I got to meet a lot of new and cool people that are interest in our business venture.
That's great. Hopefully they can join us.
I think this is great opportunity for us to expand.
Well to the best of luck!
The business meeting went really well.
Were you able to get some work done?
Yes, but I was also actually able to meet new people.
That's great. It's always nice to make new friends.
I don't know about new friends. But some of them will definitely be helpful for new business deals.
I think I realize why I'm one of your only friends.
The business meeting went well!
Did you meet any new people?
Yes, quite a few that were interested in the product.
Maybe with meeting them, they will tell their friends and we will get more orders.
I met a load of new people today.
Where did you meet them?
At a business meeting I was conducting.
Oh so they were all professionals?
Yes I met people from loads of different industries!
That's great.
Hey guys why are you all sitting around on a weekday.
We're taking it easy. How about you Tracy?
I've got no time to take it easy. I want to retire one day so I'm starting my own business.
Wow! Could we help with your business?
Sure, but you can't be lazy.
We'll work extra hard for you Tracy. We want to retire early too. So we can take it easy.
I am pleased to announced that I launched my business yesterday.
Congratulations. How will you balance your day job and managing the business?
I plan to retire early so that I can focus all my resources and time on my business.
That is a very bold move.
I want to retire young.
How do you plan to accomplish that?
I'm opening a pizzeria.
How are you going to do that?
I already got a loan from the bank and the place should be open within a month.
Good luck with that.
I'm finally able to be on vacation.
I thought you left work already?
I did, but I wasn't able to be done until the project was finished.
So your part was done, and you were waiting on everybody else?
That's correct, so I was able to leave early because of that.
Enjoy your vacation and travel safely.
I spilled ink on my new pants.
Were you able to wash it out?
Yeah, eventually, but I was going out after work so I had to go home and change.
You left work to go home and change clothes?
Yes, but I waited until I finished my work and skipped my lunch break so I could go home a half an hour early.
That was smart. So you can still make it to your after-work event on time.
I was almost late for the party the other night!
Why, did you have to work late?
Well, yeah. I had to complete my work before I left. Then I had to go home and change.
Well, at least you made it there.
I was glad when I finally got there and had a chance to chill out.
Sounds like you had a busy day!
I finished planning out the schedule of courses.
Good for you. Is it a lot?
Yes but I was able to get what I need each semester so it'll take a while but I will get them all done.
That's great. How far in advance do they post classes?
The professor told me what's coming next year so I could plan it.
That's good luck. You know what's coming.
I'm trying to graduate this semester.
Your class schedule must be full then.
In order to graduate I had to make a full schedule and have no room at all for anything else.
To get what we want we have to sacrifice at times.
Exactly, and I'm making a social one.
It will be all worth it in the end Skylar.
I finally figured out my schedule for the next two years of school.
Two years, your just a sophomore, you don't need to plan that far ahead.
I do for my double major. I need fifty credits for each, and they don't over lap much.
That's a lot of credits to have to take.
I know, and I still need to get all the rest of the interdisciplinary classes done too, but with this schedule I can do it all and graduate on time.
I guess I should sit down and figure out my schedule too and make sure I am on track with my classes and credits.
I have decided eat healthy food for sometime now and that's what I just ate.
That's really nice, I always fail, I need more discipline.
I get you, it took a lot of dedication for me as well.
Another thing is I don't know where to buy healthy meals.
No, I don't buy meals, I always cook my food at home, that way you are sure what you are eating is really healthy. I can share recipes with you, if you like?
I would like that very much.
Do you want to come over for lunch?
Why don't we go out for lunch?
I like to cook my own food. It's much healthier.
What are you making?
Fruit salad and veggie pizza. Are you interested?
Make that veggie pizza a pepperoni and sausage pizza and I'll be right there!
Hey do you want to come over for dinner?
No thanks, you always eat that healthy stuff and it never looks good to me.
Come on, you might like I.t
You know what fine.
Great see you at 7.
Cool see you there.
We have been saving so much money, by cooking the food at home.
What made you decide to choose to eat healthier.
I went to the a doctors and all of my numbers were up.
So did you start eating healthier by making small changes?
Yeah, we just started adding more fruits and vegetables and cut out all the fast food.
When I stopped eating fast food, I lost 40 pounds.
I'm feeling exhausted.
Yeah, why do you look so beat?
I've been walking my dog all around the neighbourhood in dozens of circles, waiting for it to go to the bathroom, and that's tired me out.
Why won't it go to the bathroom?
The doctor said that my dog is suffering from some kind of trauma and that's probably the root cause.
I never knew dogs could suffer from trauma.
Lee's mom is going to help me with the surprise on Sunday.
Did you need to me to go and get any of the party supplies?
That would be awesome!
I can make the cake and save you some money if you would like as well. You are already doing so much with the surprise party.
I had to wait until Sam went to the bathroom to ask his mother for help.
I know. I wondered how you were going to ask her to help with the surprise.
We had just ordered our food when he went to the restroom.
What did his mom say?
She said she would be happy to help me surprise Sam.
Good. Having her shop and pick up stuff for the party will make it less suspicious.
You know Lee is my best friend in college?
Yes! I remember Lee.
Our parents like to get together for Sunday lunch with them.
That will be so fun! They will get to know each other better.
I even asked Lee's mom to help with a surprise for Lee.
Lee would love that.
Lee and I had lunch with Lee's folks again yesterday afternoon.
It's great that you all get along!
Yeah, they're really great. I want to put together a little surprise party for Lee's birthday next month.
Oh, that's right! I forgot about his birthday!
Yeah, I asked his mom if she'd help me arrange it, and she said she would.
Great! It'll be fun to see Lee's reaction!
Did you know Riley and I were friends?
How come you don't talk anymore?
I can't be friends with someone who stole my man.
Did she actually do that?
Yes. Her current husband and I dated right before they got married.
That is a sleazy thing to do to a friend.
I don't know if I can ever be friends with Riley again.
It seems like she wants to be friends with you again.
Do you know how awkward it would be, being around her and my ex.
Not only your ex. Your ex that she stole from you.
Exactly. I don't think we can be friends again.
You know she is going to call you petty, right?
I finally found out what was going on at my place!
What happened, what was it?
I caught a mouse that was the responsible for the gnawing sounds.
How did you catch the mouse? The little ones are fast!
I used some cheese and caught it easily.
I am glad you caught it, now you can relax!
You know that mouse I keep seeing at random times running around my house?
Yeah, you told me about it. What happened?
Well, I kept seeing little rat poos everywhere and yesterday I heard a gnawing sound coming from the kitchen cabinet.
Did you set a trap or anything?
No! That's totally inhumane! I managed to lure him out with some cheese and release him back outside!
Sorry. You love animals a lot more than me. I forgot. Hope the little guy is safe now.
Wow, I thought we had a ghost. I was hearing noises all week. It freaked me out.
That is freaky. What was it?
It was a stupid mouse. I found droppings all over the place.
Did you whack it? They are nasty little things.
No, that is cruel. I just put some cheese down and trapped it. Then I drove to the fields near the school and dumped him there.
Oh great. Now it will get into the school's lunch room. Nice going Tracy!
What is that sound I am hearing?
What sound are you talking about?
You don't hear that? I am hearing something eating.
Okay go check what it is.
Okay maybe it is a mouse, let me put some cheese here.
It worked! There is the mouse.
I wrote some stuff down today.
Why?
I just wanted to express my feelings about the situation.
Did it make you feel any better?
Yeah it did actually.
That's cool.
I could not get into the house.
Was there a problem with the lock?
I was trying to get into the house with the wrong key.
That will get you nowhere, fast.
We turned the key in the lock and it jammed.
A locksmith just pulled up into your driveway.
I am trying to get in the house but the key will not work!
Have you tried turning it to the left?
No, only to the right.
Well turn it to the left then!
Okay, that worked. Thanks.
I was feeling really down and I just couldn't shake it, so I decided to see a counsellor.
I'm sorry to hear you were feeling so bad, but I'm glad you did something about it. Did it help?
Absolutely. Just talking to someone who was totally unbiased was a big help.
Did you just seem them once or will you be going regularly?
I'm going to go for at least the next six weeks, and then we'll decide together what the next steps are.
Just remember, I'm here if you ever want to talk to someone else as well.
I was starting to feel like everything was piling on more and more. It was too much.
It's so hard not to let the stress get the best of you sometimes.
This was the first time I really felt out of control though and it scared me. My emotions were all over the place.
That's a hard spiral to escape from. You seem okay now though.
I finally called that counsellor that had been recommended to me. It is already making a difference.
See, you just needed a helping hand to guide you, that's all. I'm glad you found it.
I was resistant to counselling at first, but I'm really glad I went.
I heard you were going through some issues.
Yeah, I've been dealing with emotional problems lately and needed help.
You seem a lot less angry now that you've been going to counselling.
My patients health has come a long way.
Have you managed to cure the cancer?
Sadly it is thought to be incurable.
That is unfortunate, but it's good to hear that their health is improving.
Yes, a little bit of positivity can have a big impact.
Fingers crossed things keep on improving.
I finally landed my dream job.
What are you doing?
I am working at the animal sanctuary.
That sound like a great job.
It is, it's something I've always wanted to do.
Oh good for you then!
I have a passion for helping to protect different species of animals.
These animals are endangered species, and we need to protect them.
I am working very hard to help keep them healthy and full of life.
I enjoy doing this job.
I enjoy the job as well. I believe that I am fulfilling my lifelong dream.
I feel the same way.
I took Penny to the grocery store and ran into my mom and dad.
How are they doing?
They are fine. They were shopping for the family dinner this weekend. I was so tired I left my toddler with them and went home to take a nap.
That's nice of them to babysit for you.
They are the best. They help me out all the time.
That's what parents do.
I was so tired the other night, I left my toddler with my Mom and Dad.
Did you bring her over to their house?
No, I bumped into my parents at the grocery store, left the kid in their hands, and went home.
Wow. I'm sure they realized you were just exhausted.
Yes. They know I work a lot of hours.
I'm sure they understood.
I'm totally hurt. After an entire year of dating my boyfriend, I just found out he was cheating on me.
Oh man. Thank God you found out now and not later.
I know. It's killing me right now, but if this went on longer, it would have been far worse.
Now you know he's a jerk and you can move on before it's too late.
Yeah, but I'm heartbroken right now.
Don't let a jerk make you feel that way. It's not you. You're the bigger person here. He's a cheater.
I can't believe he cheated on me!
That's horrible, how long were you guys dating?
A year, I never thought he'd do something like this.
I'm so sorry, he seemed like a good person.
Well, I thought so too.
Better to learn sooner rather than later I suppose.
I took the kids out today.
Where did you take them?
We went to the museum.
That's a good place to learn history.
If you want to educate your kids take them to the museum.
That's a good place to start.
The kids loved the museum. They learned so much there.
That sounds like a fun trip. Did you explain the museum pieces to them?
I tried to  but think it was boring then. They wanted to play on the exhibits instead.
Oh, I hope they were purposely interactive
They act like it's their home when it isn't .
You have a dog. Can you look at my list of things to get at the store before I get a dog?
Sure, I'd be happy to. When are you getting a dog?
As soon as I have everything set up. Then I'm going to the shelter to adopt one.
That is really awesome. My dog is a rescue, also.
I can't wait to get mine. I'm really excited.
I am so excited about my new dog.
When does she arrive?
She will be here tomorrow.
That's great. I know you are very happy.
So happy. I spent all week getting everything I need ready for when she arrives.
You are going to have so much fun.
I want to make sure the new dog is so comfortable!
Yes! Dogs are family members too.
Yes. I want to make sure we have everything before we come home with the dog!
The dog will be so happy with that!
I'm on my way to the store right now to find something to eat.
You don't have anything in the fridge you can eat?
There's stuff in there, nothing that I want to eat tonight.
So are you going to cook or warm something up?
I think I'm going to cook something as I've been eating takeout all weekend.
Sounds good to me, let me know what you make.
I was going to make us some steaks for the game later but just checked the fridge and we don't have any.
Yeah I think Jim cooked steaks the other day.
I guess I'll have to run to the store.
Better be fast, the game starts in a couple hours.
Definitely, you want the regular type?
Nah, get something special this time, you owe me.
I'm glad that I have a good friend like Carson.
What did he do?
He paid for me to get into the museum.
You were running short on cash?
Yeah I didn't have any on me as I was broke.
Carson has always been a very nice person so it doesn't surprise me.
I want to go to the museum.
It is the opening of the museum right?
I had no money for the admittance.
Don't worry, Carson paid for your visit.
He did? Why is that?
Just thank Carson, Okay?
I went to the museum opening the other day.
I thought you were broke?
I am. But Carson paid my way. I'm a starving artist.
I guess that makes Carson a patron of the arts.
I'm about to graduate in June after four years of college.
I know you must be excited to be finally done.
Yes I just finished the last project in my web design class.
Have you lined up any interviews yet?
Yes I have with some major companies I brought my portfolio and many of them loved my concepts.
I'm very happy for you and congratulations on you future career.
I think I finally know what I want to do after college
That's awesome! What is it?
I think I want to be a web designer!
That would be so much fun! I think you would be great at it
Thanks! That really means a lot
Of course! Let me know if there's anything I can do to help
I am almost finished with school.
What was your degree again?
Web Design.
Have you started applying for jobs?
Yeah, I've applied for a few different firms. I hope to hear back from them too.
Good luck!
As of today I am a graduate.
I see your new diploma.
I went to college for four years.
In what field did you specialize?
I wanted to be a web designer.
Now got out and design something.
I asked Taylor to visit my house yesterday to talk to her.
That's nice, what did you want to talk with her about?
I have been keeping something a secret and finally wanted to let it out.
What was the secret?
That I have had a crush on Taylor!
That is exciting!
I was thinking about inviting Taylor over for dinner this Friday.
I didn't know that you had a crush on Taylor!
Really? You never noticed how I become a puddle of mush around her?
I never noticed! What are you planning to do if she agrees to come over?
I think I will order out from a nice Italian restaurant. I know one of Taylor's favourite movies is The Notebook so we will watch that movie too.
I think Taylor would love that. Good luck!
I used to be so ugly when we were younger.
Yeah you weren't the best looking person to look at school, but wow, you are stunning now!
Yeah there are a lot of things about me that took some time to develop.
Yeah they have certainly came in nicely and have paid off.
Thank you for always being there for me and being supportive.
Of course, I am glad I can help in any way necessary.
Happy Birthday!
Thank you, aww you got me a gift!
Of course I did it's your birthday!
Oh wow Carson this watch is beautiful it must have been so expensive, thank you.
I just really thought you would like it.
I love it, thank you so much!
Here's my gift. I hope you like it.
Thanks! I'll just open it up. Wow! This is too much! This must have cost a fortune!
It was nothing. You've helped me out a lot this year.
Still, though! Thank you so much! Wow!
I'm glad you like it!
Thank you again, holy cow!
I got an amazing gift because I have amazing friends.
I'm so sorry that I missed the party.
You were busy and it's understandable.
Can we catch up this week?
Of course we can, anytime.
I'll send you a text when I have time.
Skylar is keeping secrets from me and everyone else.
What does she have to hide?
She took her SAT exam last month and got the results in the mail today.
I guess she didn't want to share.
She was determined to keep the results a secret and pushed the envelope with the grade away from me.
Wait until she falls asleep and sneak into her room.
I just got my results back. I don't want anyone to see them.
Is it that bad?
That's not it. I just value my privacy. I had to push the envelope away from Skylar.
Why is she always so nosy?
I don't know what her problem is. The results are none of her business.
I just wish more people would learn to mind their business.
I heard about that big, multi car wreck on the freeway this afternoon when I knew that Rob and the kids were supposed to be in that area.
Gosh, you must've been worried, huh?
Definitely. My heart was in my throat all the way home from work.
Did you try to call him?
Yeah, but he didn't answer. I was so relieved when I pulled into the driveway and found them all safe at home.
That must've been the biggest relief. I'm glad everything was okay.
Oh no I need to call my mom now!
What is it, were they supposed to be driving there?
Yeah, they were coming home that way, so many cars involved.
I'm sure they are ok.
I hope so, she just texted me, they stayed later and missed that horrible accident.
That is great news.
Oh I was so worried about you guys! Did you hear about the pileup on the freeway?
We did! It backed traffic up for like 30 minutes.
Oh is that why you were home so late,
Yes we couldn't get around it.
Well I'm just glad you guys are safe. I was so scared
You should have called!
I'm so excited to eat dinner here!!
Me too! I've heard they have really good food here.
Do you know what the prices of the specials are here?
No but I would like to as well. Let me ask the waitress.
Thank you!
The waitress said they are 10.99. Are you ready to order?
I wonder what the specials are here.
I am not sure, maybe you should ask a staff member.
Should I go up to the bar or wait for a waitress to come around?
I would say just to wait for a waitress, I still don't know what I would like to order.
Me either, that's why I want to know the specials menu.
That makes sense.
I had an argument with Carson the other night and gave him a peace sign as an apology after calming down.
A peace sign? Seriously?
I know it sounds weird.
I get it. It depends on the situation.
Exactly. It was the right thing to do at the moment.
I understand. Sounds like you guys made up, so you obviously did the right thing.
Carson and I had another big argument yesterday.
What was it about?
Just some silly little things that got out of hand.
You two seemed okay this morning, did you manage to make up?
Yes I calmed down and gave Carson a peace sign as an apology.
Well done for apologising.
I played baseball with Austin this afternoon. He scored a home run at the end and won the game.
How do you feel about that?
I had a great time. Austin is clearly a better and more competitive athlete than me.
Isn't he on the school team?
Yes he is. He's being recruited by colleges too.
He must be great at it then.
Austin ended up kicking my butt at the game last night.
He was on point, he has been practicing a lot more than normal.
I knew that when he hit that ball, it was going to be a homerun.
You tried your best to strike him out.
I am going to have to step up my game to win next week against him.
You just need to practice more, like he has been doing.
I'm happy for Austin, but I can't believe we lost.
So Austin's team won?
Yeah, and he got a home run.
Did the home run win the game?
Yeah, it was his home run that made us lose the game.
Seems kind of bittersweet.
Austin has been playing so well lately. You should have seen him.
I wish I had. I love watching you guys play.
Yes, his home run just happened to win the game for them.
Wow. That's impressive. He must have been thrilled.
He was. So was his team. They carried him out on their shoulders.
Classic. I'm happy for Austin. And don't worry, you'll get them next time.
I invited everyone we know over for a celebration.
We deserve it. All of us. Everything we all went through, we need to kick back and relax.
That tornado, that wiped out our entire town. Who knew things like that would happen.
We all banded together though. In less then a year, we've rebuilt almost the entire town.
It was so exhausting. I almost threw in the towel.
All of us thought we wouldn't make it.
Ok, so the party is going to be this Saturday! I'm inviting everybody! Don't be late! You guys deserve it for everything last year.
No doubt, Remy. I'll be there for sure. Do I need to bring alcohol?
No, I'm going to have a full bar! All free! It's going to be great.
Sweet! I'll bring my girlfriend. Free alcohol is her kind of scene.
We worked so hard this year to get the business running.
I'm just so proud of everyone and all the hard work we put in.
I think this year our business will take off after we advertise.
I think we could end up making a good amount of money for everyone.
As long as everyone keeps working hard.
Really? They are giving me an award for teaching?
Yes, I don't think I've ever had a better math teacher.
Wow thank you!
You do a fantastic job with those kids.
Never met one I didn't like!
Keep up the great work!
My style of teaching has been getting a lot of praise lately.
How come? Is it a great teaching method?
Yes, it's amazing. Most of my kids get passing grades and those who've struggled in the past are now passing.
That's amazing. This is what a teacher should be doing.
Now the school wants me to teach the other teachers.
I teach math at a local high school.
Oh what kind of math do you teach?
I teach geometry honours class.
Fancy! I heard you teach really well to students.
Yeah the principal acknowledged me about how I teach, since I have an unique style of teaching.
Wow! so your method seems to work on students.
I got totally lost at a carnival today when I went to some game booth.
What happened to the people you were with?
I sort of wandered away to play this one game and it was so crowded I guess they didn't notice.
So how did you get lost?
It's a state fair grounds so it's huge and I hadn't paid attention to where I was.
Well at least you got out of there okay.
It took me a while to find my friends because they were on a ride.
How did you get lost?
I went to the bathroom and got distracted by this game.
You can't do that in a place like this.
I know, I learned from my mistake.
At least you found them and got to enjoy the rest of your day at the park.
Alex was so good in the school play.
Did he have a big role?
Not a big one, but I loved his acting.
Maybe I should buy a ticket.
I'm preparing for Cameron's emergency.
That is nice of you.
Cameron is about to give birth pretty soon and I do not want her to worry.
You did the right thing.
Any good partner would do that.
Cameron is lucky to have you.
Sorry I've been so busy. Just been preparing a lot of stuff for Cameron's pregnancy.
I hope everything is going well.
It is. It's just that she could give birth any moment.
Wow, that's exciting.
It is. I'm just really tired.
Well, after she gives birth, you can reward yourself with some rest.
Cameron could give birth any day now so I have been prepping for the birth.
That is so nice. So she is close to giving birth?
Yeah, she is very swollen. I can't wait till this is over.
Your first child is always the most special.
Don't remind me or I will start crying.
Did I tell you what Addison did for me the other day?
No what did she do?
I was failing my paper and she offered to help.
That was really nice of her.
Yes she really reassured me that I had the tools to fix the paper.
That was a really nice thing she did for you.
Do you like my new watch?
I love it where did you get it?
It was a gift from Quinn.
Wow, he has great taste.
He sure does, I hit the jackpot with my boyfriend.
Does he have any friends with similar taste?
I love Quinn, he's such a great friend.
Oh, what'd he do this time?
He bought me a ton of gifts for my birthday!
That's seriously so cool, were they good gifts?
The best, each one was heartfelt and wonderful.
I'm so happy for you!
I work as a public relations.
I see. What exactly do you do?
I just make people look good even if they are not.
That seems hard to do right?
I have my ways it seems to work well.
Even if the person is horrible?
I hope Casey likes what I've prepared.
It smells amazing, is Casey coming over?
Yes, I wanted this dinner to be special so have cooked her favourite meal.
Is that shrimp cocktail?
Yes I thought it would go good with this white wine I picked up for an appetizer.
I am sure it will be great Riley.
I invited Casey to dinner at my house last night.
Did Casey agree to come over?
Yeah, and we had dinner that seemed to go well.
What did you eat for dinner?
Steak, potatoes and salad.
Did you make this yourself or hire a caterer?
Guess who came over for dinner the other night.
Well, it wasn't me, I know that. Why wasn't I invited?
Because I wouldn't want someone to interfere with my private time with Casey.
Casey? Really? Casey had dinner at your place?
She sure did. I finally worked up the nerve to ask. We had a lovely meal.
Good job, dude! I knew you had a crush on her, but I didn't expect this!
It took hours to come up with a plan for Sasha's science project.
Oh yeah? Why did it take so long?
Neither of us is scientific. We brainstormed one thing after another.
So you had lots of ideas.
With no way to execute them.
I see the problem.
I finally figured out an idea for Sasha's project. A collage of old cars contrasted with the history of the 20th century.
That sounds interesting. But does Sasha like the idea?
I still need to tell her. I don't think she is into cars, but  I can help her with that. I love cars.
Okay, you might want to make sure she is intern in it too before you get to far ahead of yourself.
I think we've had a breakthrough on Sasha's project.
Good. So you guys are ready to start?
Yes. We had a marathon brainstorming session and it finally dawned on us what she should do.
You don't have that much time left so you need to get started right away.
I know. We are starting up, immediately.
I just had a huge fight with Kai.
Tell me all about it.
Well he did something I didn't like and just ignored him.
Did he try to apologize?
No, that's the worst part, it's like he doesn't care anymore.
I get you, it must be hard to be in that situation.
The doctor seems like such a hassle. I was hurting all over and decided to seek self-care.
The lines could be long.
Last time I waited four hours at the my doctor's office.
If you are uncomfortable already, that's a really horrible wait.
The pain was killing so I looked everywhere around the house and found an expired bottle of strong painkillers.
They will still work.
All of this pain is killing me.
Where did it come from? You should go to the doctor!
I have no idea! And no way, I will just take care of myself.
Okay, but go to the doctor if it does not improve.
I guess I will have to in that circumstance.
I stopped going to the doctor after the regiment didn't work.
You really should try to stick with it.
My body hurts all over. Only I can take care of myself.
The doctor told you this could be a side effect of the medication.
I just don't find the results satisfactory.
It still doesn't make sense to abandon other possible treatment regiments.
I just threw up and I am so achy everywhere, I don't want to end up at the doctors.
You could try some alternative meds?
Do you know any good ideas or websites took for some?
Yeah let me text you some websites. But the most important thing is always, liquids and rest.
I need a solution fast!
You need some pain killers.
Yes, but from where?
I'll give you some from my kitchen.
How much should I pay you?
No need to pay!
Oh my goodness I almost left the house half dressed today.
What happened to you?
I had these pants I hadn't worn in forever and didn't know it but they had a huge hole in back.
You didn't notice it before dressing?
No. I was checking in the mirror and saw it and changed.
Thank goodness you thought to turn around in the mirror.
I lost Carson's keys.
Did you leave them at work?
Maybe, I am going back to check.
They could also be in your room.
I checked, I couldn't find them. She's going to be annoyed.
Don't worry I will go to work and help you find them.
I need to say thanks to Carson for him letting me use his car.
That was nice of him, I am not sure where he is at the moment though.
I also have some bad news for him
Oh, I hope everything is okay.
I ended up losing the keys to his car.
That is awful Riley, you need to try and find them.
What do you think about this sweater? Does the colour look good on me?
I like it, what do you think?
I can't decide, I liked the jacket I tried on earlier too.
You're going to have to decide soon, we have been here debating for over an hour now.
You're right, I'll take the sweater, it's really cute.
I agree, I'm starving, let's buy this sweater and go grab some lunch.
I bought the sweater.
The purple one we saw last time? That one was cute.
Yeah, I went back to the store after work, and decided to buy it.
It was really cute, so I'm glad you bought it.
I saw a sweater in the store today!
Did you like the sweater?
I stood in the store for over an hour debating whether or not to buy the sweater.
Did you buy the sweater?
I finally decided to buy it.
I will come check it out.
It's been so tough at the moment.
Have you been able to get any help?
Addison has been supporting me and my family.
Addison is great when it comes to things like this.
She really has been very helpful.
Let me know if I am able to help you with anything too.
Thank God for Addison.
What did he do?
My family has been going through a hard time and he has always been there for us.
Addison sounds like a really nice guy.
You remember my friend Addison, don't you?
Yes, I know Addison. She is a manager at my firm.
Really?  Well, a few years ago I lost my job and my wife was in an accident and had to spend some time in the hospital, and Addison was such a good friend to us. She helped us with our rent and even bought a cheap car for me when mine blew up.
She's the kind of person who really looks out for the people she cares about.
I hear that the Feds just indicted her on bank fraud charges and she will probably be going to prison for a very, very long time.
Well, she had to get all that money from somewhere, you know?  It doesn't make her a criminal or anything.
Last night I told Austin the truth about his car.
Was he very angry that you dented it since he just got it?
He was really mad at first and yelled at me, but then he calmed down.
You had to tell him the truth or he wouldn't trust you again.
I know, that's why I offered to pay for the repair and apologized for not being honest when it first happened.
I am glad everything is out in the open so the car can be fixed and you can relax.
So I finally got the nerve up to tell Austin about the dent in the hood of his new Corvette.
Oh wow! I was wondering if you would ever tell him the truth!
Yeah, I didn't want to, but last night I had a couple of drinks and I told him the truth.
Cool, Remy.  That was a really cool thing to do, because it's been wearing on Austin's nerves wondering what happened to his car. He loves that Corvette more than he loves his wife!
Yeah, I know he deserved to know what really happened. When he calmed down he said we would still be friends.
The truth is always the best option!
I had to tell Austin the truth about his car. Someone had dented it and it's his baby.
How did he react?
He was furious but then he calmed down and said he'll get it fix.
It's just a car. It can be fixed.
He said he'll call his insurance company and have them handle it.
His insurance will cover the damages on it.
Do you have my pay check?
I can't pay your this week, with the store being closed.
I worked the hours, give me my money.
This is going to bankrupt me.
I almost lost my pay check today?
What happened with that?
I asked the clerk about my check and he couldn't find any information on it.
That's weird, I thought today was pay day.
It is, so eventually the clerk had no choice but to give me everyone's savings.
I'm not sure I understand what happened but it sounds like you got the problem taken care of.
I cant believe the clerk accidentally gave me everyone savings like that.
That seems like a massive mistake.
I think they could get in trouble with the police.
You could too.
I should probably return all this money then.
Sounds like the right thing to do.
I read the paper while shopping. Now they say I'm a shoplifter.
Well you put it back on the counter. So you used it without paying.
But I didn't take it out of the store.
If you ate an apple in the store, you didn't take it out either.
Well, I didn't pay for the apple either.
You ate an apple too?
I saw the paper on the floor while I was shopping and got curious.
Was it anything interesting?
Not really. I placed it on counter after reading it.
What were you expecting to find?
I thought maybe it is a cryptic note left there for me.
You must have been quite disappointed.
Do you want to go camping?
What date?
How about this weekend?
Yeah, that sounds good to me.
Okay, I will put the camping gear in my car.
I am glad you will be driving, because I hate driving.
Do you want to go camping?
Yeah, that would be fun, do you have camping equipment?
I do, I already put it in my car.
Wow, you're very prepared.
It's important we all hang out.
I agree, we'll have fun camping.
I have to clean up the mess I made in the kitchen.
What mess? What are you talking about?
I was making tea and heard a creepy noise and ran out of the kitchen. The teapot went flying off the counter and smashed on the floor. There's tea stains all over the place.
It was probably nothing. I'll help you clean it.
I am not going in there again. It was like someone was moving inside the wall.
I'm not going in there either. Screw that!
Oh my god, what was that noise? It sounded like a cross between a jet engine and the scream of a bobcat!
Oh my god, Skylar, look out the window!
What? What the heck is that? It looks like some kind of ship!
What kind of ships are those?
Look at the TV! It's a special alert!
Those are definitely not from this planet!
What was that loud noise I heard from outside?
I didn't hear it.
Are you sure? I heard it while I was making tea in the kitchen.
Could the noise have come from the kitchen?
No way.
I must've fallen asleep then.
So I was making a cup of tea in my kitchen last night and I heard a really strange noise outside.
What did you do? Did you check to see what it was?
I wasn't sure what to do. I mean, it could have been a burglar. But then I was worried, what if someone was hurt or something, so I went out to check.
And what was it? What did you find?
Raccoons! They had gotten into my trash. I chased them away before they started spilling stuff on the ground.
Good thing you checked. They could have caused a real mess.
I finally ended up getting evicted from my apartment.
What are you going to do now?
I don't know. I lost my job last month and have just been sitting around playing my drum set since then.
That was really stupid to do because now you have no home!
I know. I guess I am going to have to live in my car until I can find new work.
Maybe you should sell that drum kit to start with.
I've been home playing the drums all day ever since I lost my job a month ago. Then today I was evicted from my apartment.
What are you going to do?
I had no place to go. I left most of my belongings behind. I packed a couple suitcases of my clothing and important documents and was out.
Where did you sleep last night?
I slept under a bridge. I found some cardboard from the dumpster.
You can crash at my place until you figure something out.
I finally got evicted today.
Oh no. How did that happen?
Well, I lost my job a month ago.
Were you not able to find another?
I've mostly been sitting at home playing drums all day.
Hmm, I guess that could be a problem.
Oh God I am having a really bad time!
What's going on, tell me!
I lost my job last month and have nothing to do, I have been just playing the drums.
What? You should be looking for a new job instead of just playing the drums.
I can't get a job now, I just got evicted from my apartment.
Wow, you are in real trouble man.
Flying this type of plane gave me a high like no other.
I can't believe that you are commercial pilot.
Trust me, neither can I.
I'm so proud of you and all the hard work that you have done.
Thank you, I'm glad that I had someone like you by my side.
That's what friends are for.
Passing my exams has made me a daring person.
I can see that, is this your first time flying a plane?
Yes my first time ever, I am so exited.
You have a natural talent I must give you that.
Its been my dream but I never had the courage to fly a plane before.
You should consider becoming a pilot.
I passed my commercial pilot license exam.
Wow! Congratulations. When are you going to start flying?
I flew my first commercial plane this morning.
Let me know when you're officially a pilot. I want to fly with you.
I should start flying next month officially.
I am so glad those exams are over. I am ready to unwind today and just do whatever I please.
Yeah you for sure earned it.
There is a lot of stuff I want to do.
What is the first thing you want to do?
First thing I'm going to do is get on a commercial plane and hang out.
That sounds so awesome. I think you'd enjoy that.
I really love that new organic grocery store the other town over.
It seems like an awfully long way to travel to pick up some food.
They have fruit and veggies you cannot find at the stores here.
Like what? We have Super Walmart here. They have everything.
Jackfruit! They also have Jicama and Lotus Root.
You don't even know how to prepare those. I think you wasted a lot of money and gas.
Have you been to that grocery that sells the rare fruits and veggies?
No, you're the first person to mention it.
It's not close by, it's far out of town.
But is it worth going to?
Yeah, they have great produce at a good price.
I'll head over there to check it out.
I went to that new store yesterday.
How was it? Did they have the veggies you wanted?
I was able to find all of the rare fruits and vegetables that the recipe calls for. Thanks for telling me about it.
Your family is going to enjoy this new dish, mine did.
I hope so.
They have to know you love them, with you spending 7 hours making this meal.
I am seeing a psychiatrist finally about my depression. I got a prescription for an antidepressant. Exercise and diet were not enough.
I am so proud of you for getting help. I know how much you have been struggling.
It has been difficult since my husband died. It's been a year and the depression has been too much for me.
I hope it helps. If you need anyone to talk to please feel free to call anytime.
I have been struggling for years now.
With your depression? Have you seen a doctor?
In the past I have tried all kinds of methods to treat it including homemade and natural remedies. None of them seemed to work.
That's why it's important to leave this to the professionals. Home-grown medicine does not always work as you've found out.
I made an appointment with a psychiatrist. He prescribed me 100 mg of a medication to deal with this.
It's important to take the medicine consistently and at the same time each day.
I'm going to finally do something about my depression.
What kind of treatment are you going to do?
After years of trying to treat it naturally, I finally got a prescription.
I'm happy to hear that. Just be careful with any type of prescription drugs.
Of course. But I think it will really help me.
I think it will as well. But you can also talk to me anytime you need to.
I arrive early to class all the time. I am usually one of the first ones there. I want the front row seat.
There's less distraction on the front row.
I can also see better, like no one's head is blocking my view.
That's true. You are such a good student.
I love school. I love learning and expanding my mind.
We should always be learning.
I just love school.
You definitely do.
I get here early, so I can sit right here in the front row.
I'm not sure you have to get here early for that, I don't see anyone fighting you for the spot.
Well, in any case, I get more time at school.
Lucky you.
I'm so happy that school is open again.
You and nobody else...
I'm always there early so I can get a seat in the front row.
You are so weird. I like to sit in the back.
I want to hear what is being taught...unlike you.
I'm so happy with my new laptop.
how much did it set you back?
Not too much thankfully. I got a good deal.
that's great, it looks really good quality.
it is, I've been saying up for it for over a year.
wow, you deserve it.
I am truly blessed to have my very own laptop.
You deserve it after saving money for over a year.
I agree, it wasn't easy setting aside money with each paycheck, but it was so worth it.
Now you can use your own laptop instead of having to borrow mine.
Yes, absolutely! You were wonderful to me.
I am so happy for you Quinn.
Oh I so love this new laptop, I had to save my money all year for this!
I should start saving too, I need a new phone.
It might take a while but if you consistently put money away you will eventually have enough!
I admire you for working so hard towards your goals.
That's the only way to achieve them man.
True you're my inspiration today :)
I did't have any cash at the time to give to that man.
So what did you do Austin?
I went to the nearest ATM and got some money, and gave the man a dollar.
You are really a nice person Austin.
No, I just really want to help that man.
And Humble too!
I gave the man money in dollar.
Wow. Where did you get cash?
I got some from the ATM.
Okay. Was he thankful?
Yes, he was.
That's fantastic.
Oh brother I don't have any cash for that guy.
I know man.
I finally found a ATM so I could give that man a dollar.
That was kind of you.
I am glad that I stopped by after work for this big shindig.
This is a back to school party.  Me and Martin go back to college on Monday.
There are so many people here.  Do you know all of these people?
No, most of them just live in Martin's frat house.
Work was tough today.  I am glad I get to kick back and relax here and drink a cold one.
We're glad to have you.  There's plenty of beer in the fridge.
Work has been so stressful lately.
That's why it will be good for you to go to that party!
Does my outfit look okay or is it ugly?
Stop worrying about what you are wearing and have fun!
I'm going to turn my phone off so it doesn't ring in front of a group of strangers.
You overthink everything!
I went to Addison's friend's house for a big house party after work.
Did you have fun?
It was too crowded for me.  It was like spring break but indoors.  Well, there were people hanging out by the pool outside.
Were people drunk?
Yeah a lot of people had far too much to drink!
That's a riot.
Bailey and I went to a coffee shop before work the other day.
Oh lovely! How was it?.
It was really nice thanks, I treated us both to a couple of hot chocolates .
That sounds very
It sure was!
Nothing beats a good hot chocolate.
I stopped at the coffee shop today on my way to work.
What did you get?
I got myself a tea and got a coffee for Bailey.
That was very nice of you.
Yes, usually she buys me tea so I thought it'd be nice to return the kindness.
Yes, it's always good to show appreciation.
I love this new coffee shop that opened up.
Have you been going there a lot?
Yeah, I go before work, I even got a drink for Bailey to try.
Bailey loves coffee, did he like it?
Yeah, he loved it.
I bet he becomes a regular.
I have to thank my armies for the ability to obtain so much land this year!
What could you do to show them your thanks?
We could throw a big celebration for all the soldiers and their families!
I think that is a great idea, everyone would come I am sure!
With the amount of land I have obtained, we could have the whole country here!
But the whole country didn't help you obtain the land, so don't forget that!
We have managed to take over the neighbouring territory!
Wow! You are on a roll this year!
I have been lucky enough to have some great men working underneath me.
They still couldn't do it without your leadership.
Credit for these victories and the land that we have conquered should be shared among all of us.
You are truly a great leader!
I am proud of the hard work of my armies.
You should be proud yourself for leading them!
I guess so, but you know me and how humble I tend to be.
You also received a lot of land, so I am proud of you for that as well.
Yeah, that was quite an accomplishment I guess.
I am quite jealous of your success!
While I was out of town at the meeting, my cat got sick.
I hope your cat is okay.
Robin took him to the vet. Apparently my cat ate one of Robin's plants.
Is the cat okay now? Robin needs to do a better job when he watches your cat.
My cat is fine now. I have a huge vet bill though, but Robin said he would pay it.
He should pay it since it's his fault.
My cat was sick the other day.
Sorry to hear. How's your cat doing now?
He doing good at the moment. Robin took him to the vet because I was out of town.
That's wonderful to hear. Robin is such a good friend.
I agree. Without Robin, my cat could've been worst.
Glad to hear.
I am going to start learning the piano soon.
that sounds cool, are you having lessons?
Yeah my first lesson is next week, I spoke with an actual pianist.
That sounds good.
I met with a pianist yesterday and will be having piano lessons starting tomorrow!
Oh that's great Casey! Are you excited? 
Very! I've always wanted to learn to play the piano.
That's great news! Let me know how your first lesson goes.
I start taking piano lessons tomorrow.
I didn't know you were interested in learning music.
Yes, I can afford to take the lessons now.
How much are the lessons?
It will be costing me a couple hundred dollars every month.
It's a good thing you are working now.
I asked the pianist at the bar if they give lessons.
You want to take piano lessons?
It is something I have always wanted to learn.
What did the person playing piano say?
They will give me private lessons. I start next week.
I guess they have themselves a little side hustle then.
I asked a pianist for lessons.  I really wanted to learn to play the piano.
That's great.  You should.
She told me her price and it's reasonable so I think I'll start my first lesson this week.
Do you have a piano?
My mom bought me a keyboard.  If I get really good at it, she said she'll buy me a grand piano.
Your mom is so supportive.
I had to make an emergency drive downtown yesterday.
What for?
Jesse locked himself out of his car.
Why didn't he call a locksmith?
He called me because I have a spare key and locksmiths are expensive.
I bet you saved him a lot of money.
I heard Jesse got locked out of his car again?
yeah he shut the door behind him and the key is still in the ignition, the doors auto locked. Thankfully I have a spare for him
Just as well!
He would have been in a spot of bother otherwise.
He really would have! Was no bother though.
He's lucky to have a friend like you.
How was it on your first day at the new school
Well everyone knows me as the 'new-kid'
Did you make any friends at all?
I did actually, made a fair few friends I think actually.
Excellent! I'm very happy to hear that.
My first day at school went great . I made so many new friends.
It sounds like the kids are very friendly at the school.
Yeah, so much nicer than my old school. They were bullying me all the time there.
I'm glad things are going better there.
I made so many new friends at school today
A good first day then I take it?
yeah I really like it at this new school
No one gave you a hard time or anything?
No everybody was really friendly.
I gave Bob Final Action.
That's a great video game for his birthday.
I also gave him Dream City.
You went all out.  I'm glad you gave him a nonviolent one too.
Well, our good friend deserves the best.
I'm sure he'll enjoy them and probably let us play too.
A friend of mine asked to borrow some video games from me.
Did you give them any good ones?
Yeah I gave them ones I knew they'd enjoy, I completed them already anyway so I don't really need them right now.
Oh in that case I may ask to borrow them too!
No problem, but you're gonna have to wait for now I'm afraid.
We're all went out for a nice picnic lunch earlier.
Where did you go?
To the park, the place by the lake.
That sounds like a nice place to go, I like it by the water.
It is the perfect day to do it too, the weather is nice.
Yeah it's been so lovely outside recently.
I feel so stuffed after out picnic today
Me too! Thank you for making the Italian subs I like.
No problem! They were really tasty.
They really were, could eat those every day.
haha me too!
I was so tired of being in a cage all day that I had to do something to get some freedom.
What did you do?
I decided I was going to plan an escape at my next cleaning and I waited all week for my owner to clean me.
Wow it sounds like you went to a lot of planning for a tiny bit of freedom.
I did, but I got loose and I was free for an entire day until I was recaptured.
I hope you enjoyed your freedom.
I can't believe I was trapped in that cage for so long. It feels so good to be free!
I bet it does! How did you end up escaping?
I saw how they kept opening the cage and after they had all fallen asleep, I took my chance
Wow that sounds amazing! You really are one smart duck
I am definitely so happy to be out of that small cage. I can't believe I was stuck there for so long
Well that's in the past now! We can start the next stage of our life
Just had my last patient Remy, I'm gonna go home soon
Is Remy doing any better?.
She is thank you, she's well on the way to recovery.
You are a good doctor and a good friend.
Just doing my job really.
You are far too humble.
I have been working with Remy for quite awhile trying to improve his health
I know you have mentioned that a few times. How is he doing?
Well, we just got his most recent tests and it shows that he is totally cancer free!
That is amazing!
I know we are both so happy. He deserves to live without pain and fear.
I agree. Remy is a great guy.
She said I am reduced to clean up duty for the week.
It is better than being fired, you have been late 20 times in the last 3 months.
I can't help that they schedule early shifts
If you want night shifts, I will talk to Jan and switch with you.
I've been having a few problems at work lately.
What's your situation like at work?
I work at a fast-food restaurant. But I received a final warning from my manager today for tardiness.
You need to be professional in your work and that includes punctuality.
I'm usually only 5-10 minutes late and usually it's because I was stuck in traffic. But I promised my manager I would never be late again.
Consider yourself fortunate that you've been offered another chance. Try to leave even earlier just in case traffic is bad.
So as soon as we stepped into Sydney's home office, I shut the door behind him so I could ask him before I lost my nerve.
Oh, wow!  Sydney is scary!  What happened?
Well, I was like Mr. Sydney, I came to talk to you tonight about asking for your permission to marry your daughter.
Man!  I'm so proud of you.  Then what happened?  Was he nice about it?
He was like,Son, I would be proud to have you as a member of the family, and I know that Ashley loves you very much.
Great!
I had to have a private conversation with Sydney yesterday.
What did you guys talk about?
I needed to ask for Sydney's daughter's hand in marriage.
What did Sydney say?
He supported me and gave me his blessing.
That's great! I'm so happy for you!
I had to keep Ash at home.  She had the flu but wanted to go out to play with her friends.
You don't want her to spread it.
She would all the kids sick.  She told her she could play her games at home.
Kids just want to be with their friends.
I am sure, but she can't be running around with a flu.
You are being a responsible dad.
Ash was throwing a tantrum yesterday.
why's that?.
She was sick with the flu and I wouldn't let her go outside and play with her friends.
That's fair enough, she doesn’t understand that she shouldn't be out when she is ill.
Exactly!.
I'm sure she'll get over it soon.
Ash is pretty upset with me right now.
But he's such a happy-go-lucky kid.
I know, but he wanted to go out to play today.
What's wrong with playing? Fresh air is good for kids.
Ash has the flu and I don't want him passing it to others.
Well, that's very thoughtful of you to keep him home for that reason.
It's all going very well. I couldn't be happier with Jan.
That's great. These kind of blended families can be challenging.
Absolutely. But I have always made a point of including Bliss.
Yes, you two really seem to be hitting it off.
I gave her a little gift today. That diamond bracelet I showed you.
That's no little gift! That's so nice. She must have loved it.
I gave Bliss a gift today.
It must be nice to have a readymade family.
I want to have my own child with Jan, but we just got married.
It will come in time and Bliss loves you like a father.
Bliss loves the necklace I bought for her.
It's too bad her real dad doesn't want to see her.
I gave my daughter Bliss a gift.
Who is Bliss's mom?
She's my new wife's, Jan's daughter.
That seems like a nice gesture to get to know your new daughter.
I hope that it helps to make her more comfortable at having me as her step-father.
I think you guys will be a good family.
I was so happy to see Austin when I got to that party.
Yeah I would have been nice to see a familiar face.
Austin was the only person I knew. She introduced me to lots of other people.
Austin knows everyone in this town.
Yeah she's pretty social.
The definition of a social butterfly.
I'm glad Austin is at this party. She doesn't get out much.
How do you know her?
We are both from the same town over. Austin knows everyone in town but keeps to herself.
Well it is good that she knows you really well, at least.
Yeah, I just hope she will mingle with other people. I can't stand by her side the entire night.
I'm sure she will be fine. She is already talking to that guy over there.
I realized I forgot my term paper at home
how did you go about the term paper
I drove all the way back home from school to get it
I hope you weren't too late
I think I forgot something.
Did you bring your term paper with you?
Oh no! I'll drive back home to get my term paper.
Okay. I will go first to school.
Okay, I'm so sorry.
No problem. Take care.
I can be so forgetful sometimes!
same here. did you forget something important?
yes I did, I left my term paper at home today before school.
oh no, what did you end up doing?
I had to drive back home to get it. It took so long
I'm sorry to hear that, you won't forget it next time!
I was late the other day because my car broke down.
Oh no were you stranded by the road?.
It wasn't too bad. Jesse ended up giving me a ride back.
Aww that's super nice of her.
I know, she's the best.
I hope you don't forget.
Did you end up going to the movies in the end?
Yeah we did, I had to double check with my girlfriend though.
She is a lot more organised than you.
You're not wrong there! I'd be lost without her.
Was it a good film.
It was alright, I wouldn't rush to see it again however.
I doubt whether my girlfriend will come with me to movies.
Why don't you call her and ask?
I will try that, although I highly doubt that she will talk to me from the office.
That is the only way to find out.
I just got off the phone with my daughter.
How is she doing?
She's doing well, I miss her so much.
When did you move away?
I moved last year, so it was good to talk to her for a while.
She must be happy to talk to you as well.
You never realize how important something is until its gone.
Robin what are you talking about?
Last year I relocated houses and missed my daughter. So I'd called her to talk for sometime.
Oh ok I got you.
I needed the money to pay off a debt
Unless it was a mob debt it could have waited
there was no way I could have paid it off in my life time and I don't want to put pressure on my kids
well then that's your fault for getting in that situation in the first place
You have no idea what I was going through
maybe not but I know right and wrong
I had to resign my position.
Why? At least there is unemployment.
Not for me. They had cause to make me resign.
What did you do? You loved that company.
I was caught stealing money from the accounting department. I have a gambling addiction.
With no job and no money, there is no addiction anymore. Good luck!
Do you know they have opened a new video game store in our mall?
Why would be interested in video games, anyways?
My son demanded a video game if I wanted him to study hard.
So you gave in to your son's demand.
Not really. I thought I could win the parent of the year award if he did well in school.
I hope you will win the award.
I want to be a good parent.
You should get something for your son.
I just went to the store to buy my son a video game.
That is so nice of you.
I will win the parent of the year award now.
Good for you.
I have dreamed of getting the parent of the year award.
Maybe your son will nominate you.
I hope so. That is the reason I bought him a video game.
You are kidding!
You know I am.
I didn't think you were serious.
I just won the parent of the year award.
There must have been stiff competition for that award.
There sure is, millions and millions of parents worldwide.
So how did you end up winning?
All it took was a video game for my son to say I was the parent of the year.
What a sweet son you have.
I just did a prank on Mandy.
Was that why you guys were laughing when I saw you?
It was so funny how she quickly ran away from the noise.
She is so clumsy, always.
I love her to death.
I am glad you found a true friend.
That was one of the best April Fools Day jokes I've ever played.
I'm glad you played it on Mandy and not me.
How do you know I don't have one for you also?
You better not. You and Mandy share the same crazy sense of humour and laugh at those things. I don't.
I know you hate jokes. Mandy and I laughed and laughed.
Because you two are corny.
I played a joke on Mandy.
What was it?
I gave her one of those fake scratchers that show that you've won $10,000.  She got so excited and jumped up and down.
And when she found out the truth?
We just laughed and laughed.
Lucky for you she's got a good sense of humour.
I was thinking about my past as a young adult.
Did you have a lot of adventures?
Sort of, I dated a lot of men.
That must have been fun.
It was, but I'm happy that I'm settled down now with my husband.
It is more comforting to be in a stable relationship.
I dated other guys before I met my husband, got married and settled down.
It's a good thing to try out a few men before tying the knot.
I didn't think that when I was younger because I was raised Catholic.
Catholic girls have strict upbringings.
My mom taught me that to sleep around with guys before marriage was a sin.
I am a sinner then.
I can't help reminiscing about those years before I got married.
Really? I thought you were so happy being married.
I am. But I still think fondly about all those boys that got away.
It's hard not to be wistful about the past. I'm the same way.
Exactly. And there's nothing wrong with enjoying the memories.
I agree. What you're feeling is totally normal.
I was talking about our youth.
Was is about the fact you dated that person?
Yes before we dated each other.
He is now your husband, right?
Yes, indeed. I am so lucky.
That's why everyone envies you.
I've been thinking a lot about my past when I was a young adult recently.,
Your youth must be fun, talking about.
Yes it was good, I dated a fair few guys before I met my husband
you found Mr. Right in the end though.
I most certainly did.,
I felt like I was on top of the world! It was a feeling of exhilaration.
You were phenomenal Kendall!
Thank you, I practiced so hard to be in the lead role.
You awed everyone and were spectacular on stage.
It truly was my best performance.
I whole heartedly agree!
I am so glad I got the lead.
Well you worked hard.
I always try to work my hardest.
Well it pays off, your always the lead.
Yeah, I can't wait for tonight's show.
Me either, it will be so good.
I hope people really like this play.
What part are you playing?
I'm in the lead role.
Aren't you usually in the lead role?
Yeah, so I feel responsible if people like it.
That also means you have a lot of experience and can put on a good show.
I was out fishing with Kai yesterday.
Oh nice how was it?
It was good, he hasn't been fishing before so I should him the ropes and baited his hook for him.
He couldn't have done that himself?
He didn't want to touch the worms bless him.
oh dear what is he like?
Kai and I went fishing last Saturday.
Were you on a boat?
Yes, we were on the water.
You're pretty good at fishing, aren't you?
Yes, I'm an expert. I helped Kai bait his hook.
I'm glad you were able to teach him some things about fishing.
We had such a great night at the party.
Oh I am so happy to hear that! Was it a surprise?
Yes it was and my job was to lead Jordan to the room.
That's so fun! Do you think he knew?
No he seemed surprise.
Good! I'm glad it worked out!
Jordan was so thrilled and surprised that we threw him a birthday party last night.
I'm impressed you were able to keep the planning a secret.
Me too, since I usually spill the beans on everything.
How did you get him to the party itself without tipping off the surprise?
I just led him to the door to the party room, and he opened the door.
I would have loved to see his face when he realized what was happening.
Jordan had no idea that the party was going on.
He really didn't have a clue?
I don't know how I pulled it off, I was so careful.
Did Jordan have fun?
He did, he was so happy to see all of his friends.
That's nice, I'm glad he had a good time.
The event was awesome.
I know how did you like that girl Quinn?
She was very nice and cute.
I know did you get her number?
No, I forgot to ask.
Oh well hopefully we can meet her again in the future.
I really thought that the event was fun.
Yea? Did you meet anyone new?
Well, I met a girl named Quinn. She was nice.
That's awesome! It's always nice meeting new people.
Yes, we all had a really good time there. It was nice!
I'm glad to hear that!
I had a good time at the party.
I am glad to hear that.
I met a girl named Quinn there.
Are you gonna take her out on a date?
I took a photo of the magnificent mountain when I climbed up to the peak.
You climbed all the way to the top?
It took me eight hours of nonstop effort but I did it.
How amazing is that?
I went with another person.  She's been doing it for years.
It's wise to go with someone who knows what's going on.
Have you looked at Instagram today?
Not yet, why?
Oh I posted the coolest picture. I climbed the big mountain behind the town and took a picture from the top.
Oh nice, I'll have to check it out! I bet that was pretty.
It was! After I took the photo I put the camera away and came right back down.
That sounds like fun. I need to get outdoors more.
You've got a strange look on your face, Jordan.
It's hard not to with you sucking your mouth like that.
Am I distracting you?
Massaging the balls with your hands is distracting me a little bit.
Do you want me to stop?
Actually, no. I'm good!
Gosh these balls are so huge
I know because they're someone else's. You don handle balls on a daily basis
Oh you're so right.  Its fun to make these sucking faces too
You're actions are giving me quite the unique reaction.  you are awesome
I know thank you hun.
You're welcome for sure
I enjoyed watching the play.
Did you watch every scene?
Yes! the play is full of violence and jokes!
That sounds really cool!
Yes I loved the play very much.
That was a really dark play filled with violence and comedy.
How do you feel about it?
I loved it.
That really says something about you.
I know.
Hi! Guess who I ran into today?
Who? Anyone I know?
Yeah, Sally, remember her? I was driving along and she was walking on the side of the road!
Oh, wow. Did you stop and say hi?
I did! She didn't need a ride or anything, she was just walking for exercise. We chatted for a bit, then I continued my way north.
That's nice, I'm glad she's doing well!
We played Mortal kombat at the arcade.
Cool, did you have fun?
It was amazing!  I learned many new tricks for that game!
How about the other games?
There was a cool racing game I played too!
Sounds like you had a blast!
We all plan on going to the gaming arcade.
What do you do there?
Just play games on arcades.
That's fun what your game?
Pac man and tetris.
Classics, those are fun!
There will be no more ships in my territories
Understood
Do I have your agreement and signature
Yes we will sign on one condition?
What is that
Our ships can leave with as much rum as they can carry
I told all passengers that ships were prohibited in certain places.
Was the agreement verbal or written.
Everybody had to sign a written agreement.
Why did they think they could go through that territory?
I don't know but I need to call them and let them know.
And from now on post a big sign on the docks to remind them.
Sasha asked me to come home this weekend.
Yeah, weren't you having a huge argument?
Yes, and I'm so tried of it, but we'll be alright
That's good.
Yes, we had a long talk I think we made up.
I'm happy to hear that, I hope you don't fight any more.
Sasha called and asked me to come home today. I don't know what to do.
What does your heart tell you?
I love her but I am tired of all the arguing.
Ok. Stop arguing and talk. Are you listening to each other?
She argues about the same things over and over.
If you love her, then you guys can work through this.
We just got married and are struggling financially. I told Tracy she needs to get a job.
What was Tracy doing before?
She worked as a hair stylist until the shop she worked up closed.
She should find another job at a hair salon.
That's what she's going to do. She's already called a few places.
My sister works at a hair salon. I'll ask her if they are hiring.
I think Tracy is going to leave me.
Why would you say a thing like that?
We've struggled financially since day one of the marriage. And I just can't carry all the stress of being the only one working. So I told her she needed to get a job.
How can she get a job when she is finishing her degree and is 7 months pregnant?
That was her point. I know she has a lot on her plate but so do I. I can't be the sole financial provider. I do not make enough.
Maybe you should consider a second job. How is she suppose to work when the baby comes anyway? It is irrational for her to get a job.
Did you get up to much last night Kai?
Nothing at all, I was so bored, I ended up just sticking on the TV and watching whatever rubbish was on.
Was there nothing you actually wanted to watch on
Honestly, I was so tired I didn't even check.
Why didn't you just go to bed?
In hindsight I probably should have.
I'm am so bored right now.
let's go do something
I'm too tired I don't want to move.
Want to watch something then.
Yeah just whack anything on.
Let's see what comes on.
Ugh, I have been so bored all day.
Same here, lets find something to watch on TV.
I don't care what we watch. Let's just watch whatever comes on.
That's fine with me, I just want to relax.
What a long and boring day.
I'm glad I was able to get started on my thesis research.
What inspired you to get started on that?
I got a job working in Quinn's lab, and Quinn gave me some ideas on a framework for my research.
Wow, that's great to hear. How far along is the research?
Well, it's really in the initial stages, but Quinn says that it's got great potential for a publication.
I'm glad your career is starting to take off finally.
Finally got started on my research project at Quinn's lab.
Glad to hear, what made you finally start it?
I sat down with Quinn and she helped structure the framework of my research.
Okay, your lucky Quinn is there to help.
Yeah she's super helpful and really friendly.
Well that's great.
I helped you out with your work! Why would that cause you to stop talking to me?
I don't know... I feel like you just overstepped.
I didn't mean to! I was really just trying to help I promise
I just don't need your help! You're just trying to act better than me
I really didn't mean it like that
Well that's how I felt
I guess all that hard work was for nothing.
What do you mean, Kai?
I spent so much time helping out Jan with her work and she ended up ghosting on me.
She just stopped talking to you?
Yes, I guess she got what she wanted from me and moved on.
Well that's terrible to hear. I'm sorry, Kai.
I just don't understand Jan sometimes. She's impossible.
Yeah, she can be difficult. What was it that set her off this time?
I have no idea. I mean, I spent so much time helping her with her report.
You did? And what, she didn't appreciate it? Didn't say thanks or something?
I have no idea. She's totally stopped talking to me.
I wouldn't worry about if I were you. You're better off without her in your life.
I cant believe that she doesn't talk to me even after all that work did for her
She seems to be pretty rude. I know I wouldn't have helped her for free
I think I should have charged her a basic fee upfront but I assumed she was going to pay me after
well I guess you learned a hard lesson this time
I don't really like to be open with others. It never seems to benefit me to be open.
I understand. It can be a bit hard to trust others.
Definitely. Seems others are always up to something.
Why do you think that though? Lots of people are good and nice.
I guess just from my experiences. I know to put myself first.
I suppose, but it does sometimes set you up to be viewed as untrustworthy.
I had some really good teamwork with Skylar today during the game.
You're the team's star players, so I'm glad you're learning to work together instead of competitively.
I let Skylar have the ball and do her thing.
Did she manage to score?
Yeah, and in record time!
I was so proud of my friend today
which friend?
my good friend Skylar!
what did she do to make you proud?
I finally gave her the ball and trusted her with it. She ran strongly down the field and scored
great! always good to trust your teammates
We were behind in points, so I handed Skyler the ball and tried to keep everyone off of her.
Did she end up making a touchdown?
No, but you got us so close that we were we able to make one on the next play.
That's cool. So you guys caught up?
We did catch up. But they did still win.
But that makes for a fun game and it's close.
Skylar did so well today in our match.
Oh yeah? What did she do that was so good?
We were behind so I pinged the ball over to her and she just ran away with it and scored a hell of a goal.
Amazing! did you guys go on to win?
We did! We had a massive celebration when the ref blew the full-time whistle.
Fantastic!
I broke it off with Kendall.
What happened?
I am done with him.
I saw Kendall grab your hands as he pleaded to save the relationship.
I know, he left crying.
Stay strong, I know it can be difficult.
This was a tough scene to experience man.
What do you mean buddy?
Kendall broke down. She begged me not to break up with her, squeezing my hand and crying it was bad. The thing is my mind was already made up.
Wow, that's got to be hard on the heart.
Now you know how it feels to have your own food scattered all over the floor.
I don't know why you had to toss the chips all over the floor.
Because I am sick and tired of everyone eating all my food and not replacing it.
So you thought it was a good idea to just waste my food?
Yah, maybe now you will understand how I feel when I go to get something and its gone!
No, now I have a mess to clean up!
I was so mad at Adam when he got back from the store with chips instead of fruit!
Did you ask for fruit?
I did, I need to start eating healthy and he knows that is important to me
Sorry to hear that, I guess he really wanted chips
Well he got them, I was so mad I ripped the bag open and dumped them on the floor in front of him!
Wow, you were mad!
I dumped the chips were all over the floor to get back at Steve for breaking my phone.
Was it his bag of chips?
He had just bought them for his party this weekend.
How did he react?
He understood I was angry.  He picked up them and put them back into the bag to throw in the trash.
You should tell him how you feel.
I'm home now if you want to come over for pizza and a movie.
It's getting late and I have to work tomorrow.
Oh, come on! Just hang out for a couple hours.
I'll think about it.
I had a long, hard day and I want to do something fun with my friends.
Ok, I'll come over, but just for two hours.
I am exhausted.  What a day!
How did your day go?
It was such a long day and I am so tired.
I'm sorry, but you can rest now.
Well not really, I still have things to do around the house.
True, but afterwards you can finally sit down and relax.
Whew, what a day!
You had a bad one, did you?
For sure! I put in a 10-hour gruelling shift and couldn't wait to get out of there!
Ten hours, wow! I don't blame you for wanting to leave!
Yeah, then I missed my bus and had to wait another 30 minutes for the next one, but I finally made it home!
I hope you had a relaxing evening after all that!
I really have been trying to diet, but this cake looked too good.
Oh so you had it? Did you have any pie?
Yea, honestly I had both. I tried!
It happens sometimes so I get it.
Yea, I have been doing well too.
I get it! Sometimes you just have to switch things up.
Wow I thought that vanilla cake was good until I tried the blueberry pie, that pie was the best!
Wait you ate cake and pie!
I sure did and they were delicious
I thought you were on a diet
I am and have been doing so well so I decided I deserved both, now hush and mind your own business haha
Haha ok I guess that was a valid answer
Hi, as you know, I'm on a diet, but as you don't know, I blew it big time last night.
You've been doing so well! What on earth happened?
My mother knows I'm on a diet, too, but for some reason, she doesn't seem to care. Last night she brought over a cake and a pie.
I think your mother cares, but she just doesn't know how to show you love without food involved.
Well, anyway, I ate the whole cake and a piece of the pumpkin pie.
Riley! I'm surprised you ate the whole cake, but remember, you're only human, you'll do better next time.
Guess who found the perfect apartment?
I don't believe it, you've only been looking for months now.
Well, when you come downtown to visit me you will agree that it is perfect.
When are you moving?
It is available on the first so I have already scheduled a moving company and taken the day off of work.
Do you need me to help?
i'm so excited i finally found a new apartment, and it's downtown!
That's awesome. It's gonna be really exciting living downtown.
Yeah, I'm really excited. So much easier to get everywhere.
Definitely. How big is the apartment?
It's a 2 bedroom, and it's around 1300 square feet.
That's a pretty good size. i can't wait to see it.
I have been house hunting forever.
Have you found anything interesting?
Actually, the search is over. I found a nice place downtown.
Do you plan to move in soon?
I plan to move in a month or so.
I am glad you love the house.
I have good news, guess what!
What happened?
I finally found a new apartment!
Wow! Congrats. I know you've been looking for a while. Where is the apartment?
It's downtown! I'm so happy I found somewhere!
Sound great! You should invite me over sometime!
I can't play ball today. My back is still sore.
Oh yeah? Sore from what?
I helped Jan move into her new house yesterday.
That's very nice of you. Was it a lot of work?
Yes, Jan has so much heavy furniture.
Well you are a good friend for sure.
I'm shattered after yesterday.
What were you doing?.
I was helping Jan move house, she has a lot of stuff!.
Was there a lot of heavy lifting involved.
You know it, my back is in pieces.
ouch! Remember to lift with your knees next time.
Did the loose tooth come out?
It came out last night.
Did you put the tooth under your pillow?
Yes, I received a coin. I found it under my pillow this morning.
I am so happy that you lost your tooth and received a coin from the tooth fairy. I can't wait until the tooth fairy comes again.
I can't wait either. I want to put my coins in a piggy bank.
My daughter has a high fever.
I am so sad to hear about that, have you given her anything to treat it?
I have, I gave her a flu medicine so that it would go away.
Did the medicine work?
So far she's feeling better but I am worried.
I can imagine, must be tough to see your daughter sick.
My daughter had the flu.
Oh no did you stay home from work?
Yes, I gave her medicine so it should be better quickly.
How is she feeling?
She's okay, just tired. I think I should be able to get back to work in a couple of days.
I will think of her - tell her get well soon!
I got some new medicine at the drug store.  It's supposed to be great for reducing flu symptoms, and I hope it works for my kid.
I'm sure it will.  It sure was expensive.
Yeah it was...it was like five times as much as the next cheapest medicine, and it seems like it's working well...
Taylor?  You have a phone call on line two...I'm sorry, but it appears to be the hospital calling, and they say it's an emergency.
Oh my god....Hello?  Hell....Yes, this is Taylor...oh God oh God oh God...You guys, I'm so sorry but I have to get to the hospital right now, my daughter is having an allergic reaction to her new flu medicine!
Oh no, Taylor, I'll drive you, you're in no shape to drive right now.  Go ahead down to the parking garage and I'll grab my keys!
I didn't take anything I swear it!
I can vouch for him. He was with me the whole time.
You can check my wallet I don't have any money on me.
As an eye witness I will vouch for Cameron's story. We just got here. He hasn't stolen anything.
Please I can't afford to get in trouble.
Don't worry Cameron. I've got your back.
Jesse really stood up for me when I was being wrongly accused.
Jesse is a good friend to you.
He really is
What were you being accused of?
Stealing!
What? But you would never steal anything!
I can't believe Jesse stood me up today.
I thought you two were fighting about money.
We are. He stole money from me and keeps denying it.
Well that would explain why he stood you up wouldn't it? He's probably afraid you were going to hurt him.
I just wanted to talk it out with him. I have proof that he did it, so him denying it over and over is just silly.
I'll give him a call myself and see what he says.
I had to let this woman enter the room because of the circumstances.
What were the circumstances?
Her minor son was taken away as punishment.
Punishment for what?
He committed an adult crime and has to spend time in a detention centre. His mom went ballistic.
Well at least she was able to see her son off I guess.
I let that woman come into my room.
What is wrong with her?
Cops took her kid away.
That's awful. Why?
He'd fallen with the wrong crowd to say the least.
I would be frantic if it were my kid.
I told the woman to calm down, but she's just insisting on coming in.
That's a good mother you know.
Yeah, I have no choice than to give her the right to enter the room.
That's good, cos she saw her son being taken away, she needs to understand what's going on.
I will talk to her.
That's better.
I was playing a game with Kendall yesterday and it wasn't all that fun
why? what did he do that made it not fun?
He kept trying to reach for the ball at the wrong time
what did you do to stop him?
I kept his hands at his side until it was the right side
I see, that's a good way to control him
I kept Kendall's hands by her sides so that she wouldn't cheat and reach for the ball until it was time.
Were you guys playing a game?
We were shooting basketball.
She's going to beat you. She was on the basketball team.
She's got game and very competitive.
You know you love that.
I had to instruct Kendall during the ball game today because she kept reaching for the ball before it was time.
What did you do to help her?
I made sure she kept her hands down at her sides.
Nobody showed Kendall how to play the right way before she joined the team, so it's good you stepped in and said something.
I had to keep Kendall from interrupting the ping pong game by holding her arms.
Can she play ping pong already?
She can, but was too impatient to wait her turn and wanted to grab the ball.
Did she play against someone her own age?
She played against me, and I hit high, bouncing balls for her to strike back.
Was she good enough to win if you let her win?
That is a cute name but why is the cat so mean?
Whoever had him before treated him poorly so he doesn't like anyone else except me.
That is so sad, why are people so cruel to animals?
I don't know, but at least he has a good home now with me.
You are a great person to take in a cat like that.
I just wish he could calm down a bit more around other people.
I finally went on a date with Tracy!
That's great news! I know you've liked her for a while
Yeah I was nervous, but we went on a date and it went really well
I'm really happy for you both! I hope this is the start of something great
Yeah I have a good feeling about it
Well I'll be rooting for you two!
Tracy finally agreed to go on a  date with me!.
Congratulations! You've had a thing for her for quite awhile now haven't you?
Yeah I have but always been to scared asking her out would ruin our friendship
Well what did she say when you asked her?
I asked if she wanted to go on a date with me at the weekend and she asked why wait for the weekend? So I told her to grab the keys and lets go!
I'm so happy for you!
I caught Ash cheating on me with another man.  I lost it and beat her to death.
You literally beat her to death?
You don't believe it?  I killed her.  I did it.
You are psychotic.
I was arrested, tried in court and served my time.
How long was your sentence?
How could she cheat on me with another guy?
I don't know, sometimes people just don't care about others feelings.
Feelings? She broke all my feelings, now what am I left with?
Oh stop, you will be just fine, you can do better than her.
No, if I can't have her, no one can!
Lee, I think you need to calm down before you do something dumb!
Why did you do it Lee?
She was cheating on me!
So you think you can just kill her and get away with it?.
I don't know I was just so mad, I didn't mean to take it so far.
Well you're looking at a long time locked away
It's what I deserve.
I have a really bad confession to make.
What is wrong Lee?
Ash cheated on me really badly.
That's not good.
I really didn't mean to but I beat Ash and now she's gone forever.
I don't know what to say.
We had to be up really early to leave.
Did you get to sleep at all?
A little, but Sasha had to be there like 3 hours early.
That is quite a long drive to there also.
She didn't want to miss her flight, so I just dropped her off.
That's nice that you took her.
I know Sasha had to be so excited this morning when I dropped her off at the airport.
Oh yeah, she was about to burst!  She has always wanted to visit Australia and she scrounged and saved for five years to afford this trip.
I would have loved to have gone with her, but with things the way they are at my job I just couldn't justify taking three weeks off right now.
I know what you mean.  What time was her flight?
Her plane left at 10:30 but you know how the rules are at the airports now, we had to get there at 7:00 so she could get started on checking in and going through all the security stuff.
It's really a lot of extra hassle nowadays to board an international flight.  It seems like things could have streamlined by now so that it only takes an hour or less.
I just dropped Sasha off at the airport.
That was sweet of you to give her a ride, saves her having to get a taxi.
Yeah, we left a little early, since he flight was international.
Are you going to pick her from the airport when she gets back?
I think that's checkmate Quinn.
How? Can't I just move my king back one square?
No, because that leaves him open to my bishop.
Wow that was sneaky! How'd you learn that?
Kai taught me that one. He does it to me all the time. It's really hard to defend unless you know it's coming.
Wow, I'll have to keep an eye out for that. Good job.
Did you know I've been perfecting my chess moves with Kai for the past few months?
No, but that makes sense given the way you've been playing today.
Thanks, I've been able to rid myself of bad chess strategies.
And clearly been learning some good moves.
Indeed! I just got your queen using one of Kai's landmark traps!
Aw, shoot! Now I'm going to have to study with Kai so I can beat you next time!
I felt so lonely and lost
I am so sorry to hear that
I am so thankful for Tracy, she really came through for me and saved my soul
I am glad you are getting the help you need
Thank you
I was feeling lost and alone
oh I'm sorry to hear that
Thank God for Tracy though, she really saved me and pulled me out from a dark place.
Tracy really is a diamond in the rough.
Why is there a strange car in my driveway?
Some guy broke down in front of your house. He asked me if he could push the car into your driveway.
I wouldn't have gave him permission to park in yours.
Well, you weren't home. I didn't know what to say.
I came home late last night and I couldn't park in my driveway. When is he coming to get it?
He didn't say and I have no way to reach him. I don't even know who he is.
I asked my dad what was going on and he said a man was just dropping off a package.
That is weird, it wasn't a UPS truck or something?
No, it was a normal small compact car sitting across the street from my house.
Did your dad seem weird about it?
No, but I asked him why the car was still there if it just dropped a package off and he left the room.
There is an explanation for this and we should figure it out.
I need to tell you an interesting story about what happened when I went swimming at Quinn's house.
What happened?
My grandmother almost drowned in the pool.
That's scary. Was a lifeguard on duty?
Because I'm a trained paramedic, I jumped into the deep end where she was located and guided her to the edge.
I'm glad she got out of the pool safely.
How was it swimming with Quinn and her family?
Well, t was all going great until her grandmother nearly drowned!
Oh my God! Is she ok?!
Yeah I managed to get to her in time and get her out the pool.
Just as well you were there!
I know it was a stressful experience!
What happened to you last week Addison? I heard you were in a car crash?
I was yeah, thankfully not a bad one! No one was badly hurt.
How did you crash?
It was my fault I was checking my phone whilst driving.
You should be ashamed, you could have really hurt someone let alone yourself!
I know I feel awful, I'll never make that mistake again.
I was driving down the street and wasn't really paying attention and I had an accident.
How bad was it?
I rear ended a car at a stop sign.  I hadn't noticed the stop sign was there.
So no one was hurt?
No, but the lady I hit was really mad.  I gave her my insurance information and they're taking care of the damage.
Good thing it wasn't worse.  Hopefully you'll pay more attention while you're driving in the future.
My hands have some weird lines. Do you think it could be cancer?
I hope not. Have you seen a doctor?
I am so worried about my health. What if the test comes out positive.
Then you can get life-saving treatment as early as possible.
I've been so worried lately
Oh no. About what?
My health. I just feel like something majorly is wrong, like I may have cancer or something
Have you gone to the doctor?
I haven't yet, but I just have this feeling
Well if it doesn't go away you should see a doctor soon
I made breakfast the other day.
What did you make?
So many pancakes it was unreal.
That does sound delicious
It really was!
I'll have to get you to make me breakfast sometime!
All these days of eating canned junk food I thought I'd spice things up!
What did you end up making?
Take a guess.
Oh I don't know, poptarts?
Nope! I made some mouth watering pancakes!
Oh I do love pancakes!
Was up on the roof the other night.
oh yeah? What for?
Had to climb that half-broken ladder to hang-up the Christmas lights.
You need a new Ladder Tracy.
Saw you hanging up your Christmas lights on the roof yesterday, how did you get on?
yeah not too bad, I do hate climbing ladders though.
They're not fun are they, did you have someone hold it for you?
No there was no one around to give me a hand.
Next time you need a hand let me know and I'll help.
Aww thank you that is so kind of you!
Well, it looks like I'm going to be sitting it out during the Christmas dance. I have a broken leg.
Oh no! How on earth did that happen?
I got the bright idea of putting Christmas lights on the house. I climbed up the ladder, but lost my balance.
As bad as a broken leg is, at least you didn't fall on your head. How far did you fall?
I fell about 10 feet. My mother saw me fall and started freaking out.
Thank God it wasn't worse. I'll come over soon and keep you company.
Lee is so shy about saying what he wants.
What did he wanted to do?
He wanted to go shopping with me but couldn't talk to his mom.
So did he just stay at home.
No, I asked his mom for him and she let him go.
He should learn to start saying what he wants.
Sydney was in earlier trying to reach thing s on the top shelf
Isn't she pretty far along in her pregnancy?
Yeah, she couldn't reach so I grabbed the bits she needed for her.
that was very sweet of you.
Yes she was very happy I did that for her.
I bet!
That's the kind of thing I always have to look out for.
What are you talking about?
Didn't you see that pregnant lady that was in here? When she was reaching for that high shelf?
No, I missed it. What happened?
She was straining to reach for something and was actually about to climb onto a chair. I stopped her. And probably stopped a lawsuit, too.
Could be. You can never be too careful, especially when someone's expecting.
You don't have to be overwhelmed with all these computers. You just need the basics for school
I know but I have to do accounting classes on it so I need something to handle all those programs.
You won't need anything too big because it's not for gaming or a job.
Okay and you like this one that has what I need?
Let's ask the store sales person to confirm it but I think it'll handle all the licenses and still be fast.
OK. This one is my favourite so if the rep says it's got enough memory, I'll buy it.
I finally bought a new computer.
Congratulations! I wasn't sure you were going to pull the trigger. You're very indecisive.
Luckily, I went shopping with my friend. She's the one who convinced me to buy the computer.
I'm glad your friend was around to give you a little push in the right direction.
Finally got myself a new computer.
About time! You're old one was so slow!.
I know, I was hesitant to buy this new one still but thankfully my friend talked me into it.
You don't regret buying it at all do you?
No No! I'm very happy with the purchase.
Good I'm very happy to hear that!.
Sorry I'm late I was doing chores and asked my sister to take over and she refused to help!
That's quite rude of her
Well she has her own stuff going on but I was just in a rush.
next time start your chores earlier. 
I will I will.
Good news. My boss is healthy again!
That's very good news! I know how much he means to you, and how helpful he's been.
Yeah, I'm glad. He's my mentor above all else. He was released from the hospital and is resting at home. I'll give him a call tomorrow to see how he's doing.
Good idea! My boss has been out of work too. The whole office is falling apart, haha.
Yeah, so is ours. Everyone will be grateful to get him back!
Good luck with the call tomorrow!
Riley is going to give her boss a call tomorrow.
I hope it's nothing bad.
It isn't. He just came back from the hospital.
Oh, that's nice of her.
He's always been helpful with her at work.
She seems to be a good employee.
What type of shampoo are you using Lee?
I don't even know the name of it, I just use whatever my sister uses.
I was going to say, you have such smooth soft hair!
Run your hand threw my hair a few more times if you wish, it feels like a massage on my head!
I just can't get over how soft your hair is, and your a boy!
Well, thanks, I think! Ha!
I ran my hand through Lee's hair because I was ready to give him a haircut.
He has such nice fine hair.
His blond hair is bleached by the sun.
Lee is a pretty boy.  How did you cut his hair?
It was basically a trim.  He kept the same style.  He likes it kind of long.
He's had that cut forever.  His skater boy look.
Finally got to give Lee a haircut earlier.
Oh cool, he has really nice hair.
Yeah he really does!
Did you cut a lot of his off or not?
No he just wanted a trim and for me to tidy it up a bit.
That makes sense, he keeps his hair nice.
Lee has the nicest hair I've ever cut!
It's so silky and soft isn't it.
It's great, I'd cut his hair any day of the week
Was he happy with his cut.
Yeah he gave me a nice tip afterwards as well.
Wow he must have loved it!
I really like the way jessie formatted this so i am just going to copy this
don't you think she will get mad that you copied her work
I don't think she will ever find out to be honest
you should try and turn it on late so that she doesn't see it
that is probably a really good idea
Taylor was having issues working on her Essay.
Did you help her at all?
Yeah I showed her mine and let her copy my sentence and font structure 
Mighty kind of you!
What can I say, I'm just great like that .
I feel so good supporting my friend's business
Oh what kind of supplies does your friend sell?
he just sells school supplies and things for teachers
that sounds great I think I should stop by and pick me up a few things
we can go together after we eat then
I think I made Kai rich today. I went shopping in his store.
Did you spend a lot of money?
I really did...especially for the stuff I bought. Supplies for school and work - came up to over $100.
That's a lot for supplies.
I spent a lot of money at Kai's store.
Why'd you spend so much money?
I needed supplies for school and work.
At least that's a good reason to spend money.
Yea, I needed to spend the money or I wouldn't be prepared.
I managed to get all the supplies I needed for work and school.
Where did you go to buy them.
I went to Kai's store.
How are the prices and selection?
Both excellent, so spent a lot of money.
Kai must be happy you're his customer.
Carson has so much stuff!
What do you mean?
Carson is moving and had some stuff he couldn't bring it all with himself, so I helped and took some of his stuff for him .
He's very lucky to have a friend like you.
Carson helped me bring all the rest of my stuff in the move. He's so nice.
Were you having problems moving all of your stuff?
Yeah I tried to fit it in my car. If course that didn't work out well.
That's great that it worked out. You should get a mover next time.
I'm not moving again for a long time.
I just packed up the last of Carson's items to ship to him.
Why did he leave it behind?
He couldn't fit it all when he was moving so I offered to ship it to him.
That's really nice. I hope it didn't cost a lot.
No, it was cheap and he's paying. He just needed someone to help out.
You're a good friend to do that.
Thanks again for picking me up, I thought I was going to be stranded!
So what happened?
I hit a pothole and blew out my tire, realised afterwards I left my wallet at home so I couldn't pay for a tow truck, that's why I called you. 
Oh lord that's not good! I would have started panicking if I were in your shoes there.
I was too until you picked up and said you'd help me, thanks again for this I really appreciate it.
Any time Lee, what are friends for after all.
I was on my way to work and I blew out a tire on my car.
What happened? Did you hit something?
I hit a pothole.
Did you have to have your car towed?
Yes, and I had no way to pay the driver because I left my wallet at my house.
Wow! I hope you got someone to tow your car.
Yesterday was awful, I blew a tire on the way to work.
Did you change the tire yourself?
No I had to call a tow truck, then I realized I left my damn wallet at home and had to walk the two blocks home.
Well at least you were close to home and could walk there.
I know but I was 2 hours late to work.
So what did you think of the film?
It was great! Thank you for suggesting we watch it.
No problem! It's my number one favourite film of all time!
I can see why, I'd definitely watch it again.
So happy we got to watch that film.
Meh, it was alright I suppose.
Really? It's one of my favourite films!
I thought it was kind of boring for the most part to be honest with you
I'm sorry I made you watch such a boring film then, but it is in fact awesome!
Haha, well it wasn't the best film I've seen but certainly not the worst either.
What a film! What did you guys think of it?
It was amazing! I can see why you like it so much
I honestly think it's the greatest movie ever made.
I can see why, how many times have you see it now?
I literally could not tell you even if I wanted too, its an awful lot.
Why am I not surprised.
Why did you make that scary noise as soon as the monster came on the screen?
I was just trying to give you a little more of a scare that's all.
Well it worked because now I don't want to finish the movie.
Oh it isn't that bad, you can barely see the monster anyway.
Well can we just watch something else instead?
Fine I will change the channel.
I don't think Addison likes the movie last night.
What kind of movie are you watching?
It's a horror flick with a big scary monster in it.
Does Addison not like horror movies?
I don't think so. She gave me an uneasy look before you called.
You should stop the movie and watch a romantic comedy or something.
I was watching a movie with Addison last night.
What type of movie was it?
We were watching a horror movie.
Did you get scared?
Not really, but Addison did give me an uneasy feeling about a monster that appeared in the movie.
Scary movies can sometimes freak me out!
I was moved by the movie I was watching last night with Alex
What kind of movie did you watch?
A good drama movie
I love drama movies, I always end up tearing up lol
I started to tear up during the movie, but Alex was being so nice and wiped my eye.
She's always nice and cute!
Something to sweet happened when I watched a movie with Alex today.
What was so sweet?
It was a sad movie so I started to tear up.
And the what happened?
Alex wiped the tear from my eye.
I bet you're going to be watching more sad movies with him from now on.
I just met a guy named Jordan who asked me to marry him when he met me!
Let me guess, he said it was because you are so beautiful!
Exactly. Sometimes I don't think guys see me as a person-only an object.
Well don't feel bad. You can get any guy you set your eyes on!
I know! I'm lucky that way.
And eventually you will find one who loves you for what you are on the inside as well as the outside!
When I first met Jordan he acted very strangely.
Jordan can be a bit odd, what did he do?
He immediately asked me to marry him!
Wow, that is very forward.
Sadly I had to reject his offer.
I hope Casey likes the drawing that I made of her.
Wow this is one of the greatest things I have ever seen in my life!
I'm glad you really liked it. I worked on it for over 50 hours, do you think Casey will like it too?
I think Casey would love it, it looks divine.
I made it for Casey for her birthday.
That is a great gift Remy.
I did a sketch of Casey today.
I bet it's divine, you're a talented artist.
Maybe! She seems to enjoy it.
I bet, did you use coloured pencils?
Yes, to bring out nuances of colour.
I thought so.
Your daughter is a natural at ballet.
Well, she has always wanted to take dance classes.
I am glad that you finally allowed me to take her to learn ballet.
She has always nagged me about learning to dance but I am always too busy.
It's ok, I will continue to take her to dance classes with your permission.
Absolutely! You have my permission Taylor.
My kid is the best dancer in that class hands down.
But isn't the teacher nasty?
She is but its only an act so they can do a dance reality show.
Oh, those shows are such crap.
I agree but if it gets the kid noticed, so who cares.
So its really about you not the kid?
I have been taking a friends daughter to dance class recently.
How has that been going?
It's been going really well, I am hoping she will be the best in the world.
Wow, that is  high target to set for her.
I understand but I know she has it in her to be the best!
Good luck to her!
Skylar wants me to go to this new action movie.
I thought you loved action movies, do you not want to go?
I do but I don't like opening nights because it's too crowded and we don't know if it'll be good.
It's still a fun evening to test a movie.
You're right. Sometimes the excitement is contagious.
You should go.
You know that Skylar and I love action movies.
Yeah I don't think anyone loves them more than you guys.
Well anyway, there is a new one coming to theatres and I am going to surprise Skylar with tickets this weekend!
I am sure she is going to so surprised when you give them to her.
I hope so, I went to a lot of trouble finding the tickets.
I am sure she will. She always is so appreciative.
Skylar and I love action movies so much.
I didn't know that.
I heard there is one coming up and want to watch it with him.
That would be cool.
Yes, Skylar and I will have so much fun.
I wish I could watch it too.
Things are finally going my way at work.
I overheard the boss saying really nice things about you.
My new idea is getting a lot of attention from the higher-ups.
It's about time they recognize your talent.
If I keep it up, I'm going to be rich!
My idea was the best one.
What do you mean?
Mine was picked as the best idea and I got a lot of praise for it.
So does that mean you are wealthy now ?
Well not wealthy but I am rich.
Are you going to take me out for dinner?
I told my boss about my new idea, and I earned a big bonus!
That's great, I'm so proud of you! Do you think you'll get a promotion too?
I'm not sure. That would be great, but I'm not sure if it will happen.
I hope it does. It sounds like you deserve it!
Thanks. I have my review soon, so maybe they'll say something then.
Maybe if you don't get a promotion, you'll at least get a raise.
I was searching around all night for my cat. I don't understand how it could of gotten out.
I'm sorry, I know that losing a pet is horrible.
He is my cuddle buddy, I need to find him.
Don't worry we will find him. We just need to keep looking.
Have you seen my cat around? He's black and orange.
No I have not. Is he missing?
Yes. I haven't seen him since last night. He did not come home.
Oh my. I will let you know once I see around the village.
Thank you so much. I am so worried.
Don't worry too much. Have the ability to find their way home. Take it easy.
I bought a new stereo system for my car.
Don't you need that money for rent?
Yeah, but the stereo makes me happier.
Okay. Have fun living in your car.
I'm going to need to curb my spending.
Are you having trouble paying your bills?
Yes. I spent my rent money on a new car stereo. It's great though.
I hope it is since you may be living in your car soon!
I can always come live with you.
I doubt that. Especially if you don't pay your rent. You can't stay with me for free.
I have a terrible habit at school.
What do you mean?
I like to pick on people at school.
That's awful Jordan, who have you been bullying?
Mainly the new boy, Louie, I hung him by his underpants on the flag pole.
You really should apologise.
After being broke for so long I'm glad I found some money.
I'm so happy for you that you were able to find some money
I figured the hard work will finally pay off and it did.
The field you're in is very tough and finding money is hard.
Hopefully this is the beginning of a lot of money in my pocket.
If you keep working hard I don't see why it can't be.
I found some money in the downtown sector.
Great for you being so broke all of the time.
No one claimed it so it's mine.
Great that means you can pay me back now.
I can now get an apartment and food to eat.
You will finally be off the streets.
I literally have had the biggest sense of relief.
Oh you mean for finally making some money now?
Yes! Honestly you have no idea how stressful it has been not knowing if I can pay my rent.
No Remy, I have been there before. It certainly is not fun at all.
Yeah I mean I can now even save up for retirement.
Good for you for thinking about your future!
I never knew if I would be out of debt again.
Isn't that a good feeling?
Yes I am so happy about it.
How did you get out of debt so quick?
There was money in the sector that I managed to find.
I wish you more luck in the future.
So me and Jordan are working on a software project do you think you'd like to check it out?
Anything that you and Jordan do is great, so of course I'll check it out.
Thank you, we need a new group of people to test it out and give us feedback.
I'll be glad to do that, where are you guys at with the project?
I finished the operating system and gave the interface to Jordan, now he has to do some final touches.
Just let me know when you're ready for me.
I really didn't want Carson to leave.
Why did she have to leave?
She had to go to work, but I was still scared by the horror movie we watched.
What did you do?
I grabbed her wrist in an effort to maker her stay, but she had to leave.
That's unfortunate.
Well, I had a really interesting photo shoot today!
Really? What did you take pictures of?
I got the chance to do a photoshoot of a red panda at the zoo!
Wow, have you taken pics of one before?
No, this is the first time, it's new to me.
Cool! Show me the photos!
I really enjoy this job being a pro photographer.
That's a cool job.
Yes it is, I love being able to look at unique animals close through my lens.
The camera can help capture great photos.
I love how you can see the details.
Agreed, it's a cool hobby.
I really do not feel like doing school work right now.
I can't say that I want to either.
Do you want to go to that party at the frat house?
That would be a lot of fun, do you think it's a good idea with all this homework though?
Probably not, but let's go have some fun!
Sounds good to me!
How's it going?
Hi Robin, I'm quite busy right now, that assessment is really taxing.
You over complicate things, it can easily be crammed overnight!
That would risk a burnout and poor execution.
Whatever man I'm going to a party tonight to meet some new people.
Remember this assignment is worth 20 percent of our total grade.
I skipped my homework today to hang out with some new people from school.
Don't you have to turn it in tomorrow?
Yes, but I just started school with my friend and we met a lot of new people.
They were hanging out after school?
Yes and they invited us to come so I didn't have time for homework.
I hope you can make it up in class.
I think I'm getting really good at this.
You are very good!
Should I try entering a match?
Absolutely, that would be fun.
Thanks for your support.
Good luck!
So I entered a chess tournament in the park this weekend.
Wow that's great! You've been getting really good.
Thanks! It sure has helped playing chess with you these past few months.
Yeah that's been a lot of fun. I can't ever seem to win though.
Well that's because you taught me all your tricks.
Yeah next time I'll keep my secrets to myself!
I just heard that Tracy got the job!
That's great news! I know that was her dream job.
Yes it was, she sounded so nervous when she phoned, but it was great news!
That's awesome!
I think she is starting very soon.
You should be very proud of Tracy!
Tracy told me some great news today.
What was it?
She got a new job!
That is so exciting.
I'm so proud of Tracy, she was so excited to see my response.
You definitely should be!
Did you hear the news Tracy told me?
No, what did Tracy tell you?
She is going to have a baby!
That is amazing news!
She was so excited to tell me.
I'll bet she was.
Carson didn't feel well earlier.
What was wrong?
He was having an anxiety attack. He couldn't breathe.
That sounds awful, what did you do?
Luckily I was there, I made him cross his arms over his chest so he could breathe.
That's great that Robin.
Carson looked awful earlier.
What was wrong with him?
He looked like he was having some sort of panic attack!
That is awful, what did he do?
I told him to try to take a deep breath and to cross his arms over his chest.
I hope he feels better soon.
Everyone is so mad at me after I pranked them. I thought it was funny but they think I took it too far.
Well if they didn't laugh them it was probably not that funny and more selfish.
Do you think so? Maybe I should think about others feelings more.
Yes, I think you should unless you don’t want any friends.
I should not have gone that far.
What did you do?
I pulled a prank on my friends.
Was it a bad prank?
Actually I pushed it to the limit which was wrong of me.
I got my co-worker these shoes as a gift because I saw they were on sale.
Wow, were they expensive?
My sister works at the shoe shop so they were basically free!
That's a great perk, why did they need new shoes?
They were wearing the same old shoes everyday.
I was angry at Taylor.
When?
Today, at the bar.
Where you had a drink?
Yes, Taylor and I had some drinks after work and got into a heated debate.
I hope you two were able to come to an agreement.
I have discovered when I have had enough to drink.
I learned that about you a very long time ago.
I was at the bar after work with Taylor and we were having a drink.
This could go down a bad road.
I got angry with Taylor.
I could have predicted it was that road.
I accidentally broke one of my parents' vases today.
Did you get in trouble?
Surprisingly they were very chill about it.
How did you break it?
I was throwing a ball in the house with my brother.
You got off easy today.
I got in big trouble today.
What did you do now?
I broke the vase in the hallway because I was playing kickball.
Didn't your parents yell at you to stop doing that? Also, how did they find out?
I told them that I broke it. They would have noticed it was missing if I didn't tell them.
I would have said to throw it away, but that makes more sense actually.
I can't go to the movies with you this weekend because I am grounded.
What did you do that was so terrible?
I broke mom's favourite vase when I was practicing my soccer dribble.
You were dribbling in the house when the field is right next to your house?
Yeah, well it was too hot to go outside and I had to up my skills.
You need to think through these things, you are always getting in trouble Jordan.
My mom was so angry. The vase was an antique and I wasn't supposed to be playing ball in the house.
I'd be mad too if you broke something of mine.
I'm grounded and I have to pay for the vase.
You don't have a job. How are you going to pay for the vase?
I don't know, but I'm grounded until it's paid for.
I can give you some of my babysitting jobs. Maybe one of the neighbours need yard work done.
My parents re so mad right now.
Why is that Jordan?
They were looking for their favourite vase and could not find it.
What happened to the vase?
I broke it while playing with my friends and so I had to eventually show my parents the broken pieces.
Oh boy! They must be angry alright.
So I have been wondering what to do without a garage.
Yeah, that's tricky when you have so much stuff.
I decided to put my old, worn out clothes in the backyard shed for now.
That's probably a good place to just store things.
Next I will find out about a lawnmower and where to put that.
Sounds like you are really utilizing all your resources!
I finally got rid of some old clothes. I took them out to the shed to store them. I need to give them away though.
That's good that you are cleaning up. Are the clothes in good shape?
I barely wore them. Some even have tags.
Maybe you could even sell them.
No, I would rather give them to someone in need.
There is no more room in my closets.
You do have an abundance of clothes.
It has reached the point where I have to put old, worn out clothes in my backyard storage shed.
Why not put them in the donation box at the church?
I will, just as soon as I fill up my backyard storage shed.
That won't take long.
I was able to run quite a bit today.
How far did you run?
About 5 miles.
Wow. You're getting good at running long distances.
I want to get in better shape. That's why I've been training hard.
It shows. You should be proud of yourself.
I want to get in better shape.
How are you going to do that?
I am going to run 5 miles, today!
Ok sounds good friend.
I hope I can beat my previous record.
Good luck with that.
I feel like I am letting my self go.
You are still looking good though.
I just feel like the years are aging me.
Is that why you started running?
I have been doing 5 mile runs.
Well it sure is good exercise.
What's your favourite memory?
Probably when my baby sister was born. I fell in love with her right away. What about you?
This is going to sound so shallow but it's when my dad bought me the sports car I wanted. My grandpa and I were planning to buy one and fix it up together but he died before we got the chance.
That's not shallow at all! It just means you loved your grandpa.
Yeah, dad's kind of an aloof guy so he never bonded well with grandpa or me. When he got the car, it showed me he really cared about both of us. I'll never forget it.
Now I feel like calling up my dad.
My dad bought me this new car. I'm pumped.
I'm so jealous. My dad doesn't buy me anything.
I can give you rides in my car.
I'd appreciate that. I won't have to order a taxi all the time.
You won't believe what my dad got me for my birthday!
Did you get a new bike?
I got a 1965 Ford Mustang!
Holy cow that's awesome! What colour is it?
It's cherry red. I'm so excited! I'm going to cherish this forever!
Wow I want your dad to adopt me. All I got last year was a tie.
We have to go for a drive in my new car.
You have a car now?
My father bought me my dream car, it's a sports car.
You must have been stunned.
I'm going to cherish the moment he gave it to me forever.
You can pick me up any time!
I had some trouble returning the shirt.
This was the one you bought at the Gap store?
Yeah, it didn't fit, and I had to get one that did fit.
Why did you have trouble returning the shirt?
They had to look up my credit card since I didn't have the receipt.
I usually throw my receipts away, but don't throw my garbage away before I might need the receipt again.
The shirt didn't fit so I returned to the store.
Did you find one that fit you better?
Yeah, finally! The other one was too loose.
Sometimes it's hard to find a shirt to suit your body type.
Is that a compliment?
Yeah it is, you have a great body.
Would you like to go to the store with me to return this shirt?
Oh it didn't fit you that well?
That and I got the wrong colour.
Sure, let me grab my wallet and we can head out in a second.
Just try and hurry up I want to get there before the store closes for the day.
I had thought this was going to be such a great job but I'm not too happy.
You were so excited about it though.
Yeah, and I thought it was worth waiting for when they didn't hire me right away.
But now that you're there you don't like it?
It isn't what I thought it would be.
I'm so sorry to hear that. You're going to have to look again.
I really want him to like me.
How are you planning to go about that?
I'm not sure just yet but I have a few ideas.
Like what?
I am planning on moving closer.
That's a big step.
I really like the way he played today in the football game.
Hey Kai, he did play pretty well even by my own standards.
I really want for him to like me.
How are you going to do that?
I have some ideas, I just need to move closer to him first.
Sounds like a great plan, good luck with that.
There are a lot of places I wanted to move to.
I am glad you moved closer to me.
Me too, I initially moved closer because I wanted him to like me.
How did that work out?
Not so great, but I am glad I met you!
So am I Kai.
I keep trying to sit next to Todd at the movies.
You should stop doing that. You look like a stalker.
I couldn't help myself at the last movie. I moved seats until I was next to his.
You're being way too obvious about your feelings for him.
But I want so much for him to like me!
Then you should cool it and act more natural around him.
I don't think I could get away with taking these cookies but I'm going to try anyway.
I don't think that's a good idea since you will get in trouble.
I don't really care because I just want those cookies.
I think you're playing a dangerous game, Cameron
I'm going to do it anyway.
I was just thinking about this past summer. Robin and I had such a great time.
It sounded like it was so much fun.
I loved every place Robin and I saw. I'm not sure what I like best.
It was a great summer.
Me and Robin bonded a lot over that summer.
We should all do something next year together!
Kendall and I couldn't agree on a restaurant, so we decided to flip a coin to choose.
That's a fun way to decide, who picked what?
I picked heads, I wanted Pizza.
What did Kendall want to eat?
She wanted to eat Pasta, in the end it was tails so we went with her decision.
Pasta is great too.
Kendall and I couldn't seem to decide on a place we both wanted to eat.
How did you end up deciding?
We decided to flip a coin to see where we would eat.
Who won the coin flip?
We did a best of 3 coin flips and in the end Kendall won so we went with her choice.
That's unlucky for you.
Do you remember my friend Kendall?.
I think so, how is she?
She is doing great, she came out for a meal with me the other day.
Where did you guys eat?
We couldn't agree on a place so we flipped a coin.
That sounds fun.
I'm so hungry.
Have you eaten today?
No.
Why not?
it's not important, I'm just glad I can finally eat now.
Well eat up.
I can't believe how long this meal took!
How long have you been cooking for?
I have been in the kitchen for hours.
You must be so excited to eat!
I am starving! It is going to be delicious.
I am so jealous. I wish I had something good to eat!
I was feeling ill, so I took some medicine.
Did it work?
I took it too fast and it didn't sit well.
I am sorry to hear that.
I think I'm visiting to California after school.
Do you like it that much?
Coming from where we live, it was a world away.
Yeah, we live in the middle of nowhere.
Maybe we can move out there together?
I'll definitely consider it.
I can't believe I dropped everything I bought.
Let me help you pick them up.
I guess I should have set them down while opening my trunk.
Yes, hopefully nothing is broken.
I hope not. They are all gifts for my son.
I'll help you load them into the trunk.
I don't want to invite those people because I do not know them very well
That sounds like a good idea and you can save yourself some money on the dinners too.
I think we can replace them with my step-sister's family.
That sounds like a great idea. Just let me know who to add to the list.
My job situation has sure improved a lot lately!
How so?
I decided that I deserved more money than I was making, so I asked for a raise!
That was brave of you!
It was scary, but I'm so glad I asked. They gave me even more than I asked for!
Congratulations! I'm so happy for you!
I feel so much less stressed out ever since I asked for a raise and received it.
Good for you, I am too afraid to ask for a raise, I am intimidated by my boss.
Don't be. There is nothing wrong with asking for a raise, it's part of life.
You don't think my boss would be upset with me for asking for a raise?
Not at all! In fact it's a great time to tell him about the wonderful work you do, and remind him how important you are.
Very good point Kendall. I am going to write down some reasons as to why I am a valuable asset and ask for a raise.
I worked so hard to get a promotion this year.
I bet you're glad that you're making more money now too.
It does feel good to make more money and to be rewarded with extra benefits.
Maybe you can take me to Hawaii this year on vacation?
I need to save up for a new car so that probably won't happen any time soon.
The job raising my pay is going to improve the quality of life over here.
Yeah, more money makes things easier.
It sure does.
Well done for securing more pay.
I decided to join the feminist club at school.
What changed your mind Sydney?
I read some more about the history of movements and the specific goals and past actions of this particular club.
What sticks out about this club, then?
They created some programs that really did help many young attendees learn about science and technology.
Girls should be encouraged to get into scientific fields.
After a lot of thought, I've decided to move forward with the women's movement.
Wow! I knew you were passionate about that stuff, but I didn't know you would keep going on your own.
I finally feel like a leader for the first time in my life. The movement has really changed things for the better.
I wish you all the best.
I have been so inspired by some of the progress I've seen.
I know, the movement has been making some amazing strides.
The more involved I get, the more I want to be in some kind of leadership role.
You do? That would so great for you. And for the movement.
I'm going to talk to the steering committee about it. I think this is my moment.
I'm so impressed with this newfound attitude of yours.
I had a heck of a baseball game today.
Oh yeah, I was reading about your statistics after the game.
Yes, I had two doubles and a home run.
That was a great hit and it sailed over the fence by 30 feet.
It might have been the farthest home run I ever hit!
You are having a great season, Jordan!
I am getting really good at baseball!
Did you guys win your game last night?
Yes, I hit the ball out of the park and ran the bases for a home run.
You must've felt extremely happy about that.
I was! My teammates and I went to get pizza afterwards to celebrate the game.
That sounds like a lot of fun!
Can you believe that?
That was an amazing hit!
I don't think I've ever hit the ball that far.
I think your homerun just saved us the game, awesome job!
Thanks man.
Keep it up and we got this.
Will you keep the  puppy at your place?
He is going to be so surprised when you give it to him tomorrow night.
I hope that he likes him.
Do you have the little box to put him in?
Mark is going to be so excited to see this new dog I got him. My plan is to keep him from seeing the dog until we come home from our date. It will be a perfect night.
Okay, so do you want me to keep the dog at my house until then?
No I want you to keep Mark preoccupied before our date. I will be keeping the dog in our apartment.
Okay Riley, it is a plan. I will take him out to get a cold one at the bar.
Just make sure that he doesn't go to the apartment.
I will make sure he doesn't go near there.
I think I made a hiring mistake today.
Oh no, what happened?
I think I hired the wrong person because I got desperate.
That can happen, maybe they won't be so bad?
I ignored a lot of negative feedback and they were the first person to apply!
I see. Hopefully they will work out for you.
I met a new friend today at work.
That's nice, do you two get along?
Yes, we hit it off straight after we met.
That's great to hear.
I think he is hopeful for a long friendship.
That would be fantastic for you both.
I met a new friend the other day. He was nice to me at the bar.
I only meet creepy dudes at the bar.
Nice guys are hard to come by. Definitely.
Are you going to introduce me to your new friend?
Not yet. He's moving a bit fast for me. He's already talking about wanting a long friendship.
Doesn't that just happen naturally?
I met someone really nice today.
It is nice to meet new people.
They said they were hopeful this would be a long friendship.
I hope it works out for you two.
Dang it!
What happened?
I spilled red wine on the carpet.
You know you aren't supposed to have red wine in carpeted rooms.
I know! But how do I clean it up?
Something to do with vinegar I think.
I really should have known better than to set my wine glass down on the carpet.
That sounds like a recipe for disaster.
It was, I forgot where I set the glass for a moment and spilled it all over.
That's horrible, isn't your carpet cream coloured?
It was, now it's red because of the wine!
Your wife's sure not going to be happy!
I really made a mess last night.
Why, what happened?
I was having some red wine and I spilled it all over the carpet.
That must've been tough to get out.
It sure was, the stain is still there right now.
That is why it's never a good idea to have red wine on the carpet.
My landlord sent me a second bill through today.
Why did they send a second one?
I don't know, I already paid my rent, so I called them up.
What did they say?
They said it was a mistake on their end and not worry about the second payment.
Wow, why did I get another rent bill. I've already paid my rent for this month.
Maybe its for the late fees? Check your lease agreement.
You're right. But 30% is predatory.
Well, you need to work on getting it in on time. They get away with it.
No, you don't understand, its a 30% late fee for next months rent.
You know there is nothing wrong with planning ahead.
The landlord hired another stupid assistant.
What makes this one so stupid?
The landlord sent me another bill even though I already paid our rent.
Is the assistant in charge of billing?
I called the landlord and the assistant admitted her mistake.
I wouldn't call her stupid, careless maybe, but not stupid.
I'm feeling a little guilty that I sent the kids to the fight.
What did you do that for? Isn't it dangerous for them to be at a fight?
Yes, but I knew their family would be there to pick them up from the fight.
I guess you had to do it, then, if that was the way to reunite them with their family.
Yes, the last I heard, they're safely at home with their parents.
I'm glad you could play a part in making sure they're safe and sound.
I bought tickets for my brothers to go to the fight. My parents live in that city so they can go home then.
That's a nice thing to do.
They haven't seen them in a few years so I thought it was a good idea.
Were the tickets expensive?
Yes! I had to pay $250 a ticket plus fees. It's worth it, though.
It was a really difficult situation to get free from that tunnel.
How did you do it?
I just used a pipe I found and hammered away at some of the lighter debris.
Wow. You saved a lot of lives.
I'm just glad all of the people that were with me are okay.
I'm sure they're glad you were there.
I'm going to hammer through this tunnel.
I'll help out.
It is so we can escape.
Sounds good friend.
How bad do you want to escape?
Really badly!
Do you know which way our house is?
I think it's east.
I'd better start digging, we've been in this tunnel all day and it will be dark soon.
Yeah, don't want to get caught out at night.
What was that?
I don't know, dig faster!
You know those Jordan's everyone is wearing?
You mean the ones on my feet?
Yes, those would be the ones. I bought myself a pair today.
They're super expensive. How did you afford them?
I've been saving up my money for months, that's how.
I can't wait to see them on you!
Do you like what I got? Everyone else was wearing this watch so I got one too.
Oh yeah, I've seen a lot of people wearing it.
It does a lot of cool things too, I can even make calls on it.
That's awesome. Now you'll fit right in with all the other fancy watch people.
I guess so.
Just what you wanted!
I'm always looking to add to my book collections.
I know you have loved to read books since we were in school.
Yes I love to read everything.
Would you also love to read old newspapers?
Yeah, if it had relevant information.
I bought that new book you recommended to me.
Do you like it? You read everything.
I know I have over a hundred books, but I can always add another.
Ok, tell me when you are done and we can discuss it.
I just bought a couple of books to add to my collection. I go through books so quickly. I try to read everything I can get my hands on.
You are such an avid reader.
My mother always bought me books when I was growing up.
Life long reading is a great thing. I wish I had more time to read.
I haven't read as much as I used to. Now I read a book a month. I squeeze in reading time on the train to work.
You have a pretty long train ride too.
I think I might hit up some used bookstores today. I want to find some new stuff to read.
You really like books, don't you?
I really do. I've been like that since I was a kid. I want to find some old books to add to my collection.
No wonder you're so smart.
I required an answer from Bailey in class today.
What were you doing in class?
I was teaching and asked a question that required immediate answer.
That is nice.
Thanks I appreciate that
You're welcome.
Today was just another usual day at school.
Sounds typical for you. Tell me, what subject did you teach again?
I teach world history. Today we were going over 18th century France.
I know that's a topic you feel really passionate about.
I also want a good grasp of how I'm doing as a teacher. So I sometimes ask them questions to gauge their knowledge.
Teachers and educators are really passionate about what they do. They try to help students learn like this.
I asked Bailey a question today to see if she was listening.
Was she not paying attention?
She was chatting with her peers, so I asked a question and said that I required an answer otherwise she would have to see me after class.
Did she manage to answer your question?
She gave me an answer, but it was incorrect so I gave her a detention.
I bet that will make her pay attention from now on.
It's hard to talk about sometimes, but then other times, I am happy to talk about it.
I can't imagine, what branch were you serving in again?
I am with the Marines, I have to ship out again in two weeks.
Do you know where you are going this time?
I know I don't have to do another tour, but I know I have to do something.
They don't really tell you much over there.
Well, I'm glad I'm back for the marine tour, but boy am I a different person.
I'm not surprised. Your experiences have made you stronger.
That's a good way of looking at it. You wouldn't believe the things I saw.
You must have a hard time talking about it.
I do. It's like life or death, you know?
Well I think you've become a stronger better person from that. It takes a lot to deal with what you had to face. I admire you for it.
I signed up for the Marines and shipped out last year.
You were gone a long time.
I was on tour of the Pacific.
It is good to see you home.
I have returned home for a short leave but am shipping out again soon.
I guess that is the life of a soldier.
I'm back home now.
I'm so glad you're back.
I am so happy to be home and to sleep in my own bed.
Thank you for your service.
I'm just glad to serve my country and keep everyone safe.
You are the real hero!
I finally got the hang of how to prepare the gift bags after watching my boss do it.
So how many bags do you have to make in a day?
I have to put together at least 100 bags on my own before the day is over but they want more usually.
That is a lot of bags, you should get paid per bag!
I wish, maybe I would have the incentive to work harder.
I think I would get so bored trying to do that job.
They had me doing gift bags today at work.
That's great. That means they have confidence in you.
I know, it's nice. They're not that difficult, the gift bags, when you get right down to it.
So you're comfortable with them now?
Definitely. My boss gave me a little demonstration so I'm just following his lead.
Cool. Those things are so nice, it's no wonder they sell so well.
I was so riled up at the meeting yesterday.
I never thought that you would get a word in.
With the rest of them running their mouths and debating everyday, I just had to finally say something.
They argue about everything, except what need to be said. I am glad that you stood up and told the truth.
The truth needed to be told, I was tired of being quiet.
You did what was right, by telling the truth about what they have all been doing.
Even though the debate got kind of heated, I think it was still a good thing.
I'm surprised you're still in a good mood.
I thought it was a positive thing since everybody was respectful.
It seems like it was a good debate then.
It was. I felt like talking the whole time.
Don't you feel like doing that all the time?
There was a huge debate at school yesterday.
What was it about?
We were talking about the Civil War.
Did you contribute to the debate at all?
As a matter of fact, I did. It was a rancorous and heated debate, but I still felt like talking.
That's not much like you. You usually stay in the background.
Addison knew that I had worked on the project so he got me in on Kai's trademark application.
Addison's looking out for you.
That's because we go way back.
How did you meet?
I were on the same football team in high school and the same frat in college.
You guys do have a history together.
Addison helped me get added to the trademark application for Kai.
That's pretty cool. Why did he do it?
He knew I had put in a good amount of work on the project too.
That's a pretty good boss. Most people wouldn't do that.
No, Kai wasn't planning to have me added either.
Kai just wanted all the glory for himself like usual then.
I was able to install the solar panels.
Was it difficult to do?
A little. I had to make sure that the power structure was properly maintained.
Maybe you should install solar panels at my house as well.
I can definitely do that if you want.
Definitely. Considering all the electricity I use when you come over to play video games.
I've installed solar panels on my roof to reduce my carbon foot print. I feel pretty good about it.
That's a good plan. Energy costs and global warming are becoming more of a problem everyday.
I've been taking care of the power structure, and the cost is not too bad. It just takes some work to maintain.
Just like anything worthwhile. You have to take care of it if you want it to work well and last.
That's very true. The panels seem pretty sturdy, but the cables require insulation that has to be replaced annually.
That's not such a big deal. It sounds cost efficient.
I did really well in the race today.
Who were you racing with?
I was running against Jan.
Oh, Jan is very fast!
Yeah, but I was really close to her.
You must have been running really well!
I'm going to beat Jan next time we race!
Where did you get the energy?
Jan and I just had a practice race and I was able to get pretty close behind her.
Jan is a very fast runner so you must've been going really fast too.
I'm going to practice until I can out run Jan.
Good luck with that!
Lee left such a mess that I spent a few hours cleaning.
What did he do?
He crashed in the living room and left his clothes and dirty dishes everywhere.
That's inconsiderate of him. He should have cleaned up before he left.
He overslept and was late for work so he just took off.
You should have a talk with him.
This is almost as amazing as it is horrible
Lee left it this messy?
Yeah I have been cleaning for a few hours already.
How the hell did it get so bad?
I'm sure that little bastard had a party with out telling me.
That explains this pile of cans I just found.
Look at what the clumsy Lee did to my outfit!
I saw him spill his whole plate of food on you.
Well I think he was drinking too much alcohol.
So that explains why he made such a mess.
Then he offered to clean my clothes, but it took him forever to work the washing machine.
At least he tried to do the decent thing and make up for his mistake.
Why would Taylor yell my name like that?
Maybe she needed to get your attention.
I'm sitting right next to her though.
That's a good point.
Yeah I know.
Don't brag.
Do you know why Taylor was screaming at me?
I didn't hear her scream.
She yelled my name for some reason.
What was it about?
I still don't know, I couldn't hear Taylor over everyone else chatting.
Maybe you should chat with her.
What an embarrassing moment at work yesterday!
What happened?
Alice was giving her presentation and I guess Taylor needed my attention that very moment so he started yelling my name!
Are you serious? What an interruption to the meeting!
Right, and to make matters worse the boss's boss was on conference call in the room at the time!
Oh I sure hope someone tells him how unprofessional that was!
I was not feeling good at the museum.
Why did you not leave early?
I wanted to but I could not find my way out.
I am sorry about that. How do you feel now?
I am better now.
You better relax.
I'm lost in a museum.
What? Why are you lost?
I can't find the exit anywhere.
Find somebody that works there that can help.
Ash wouldn't stop begging me to go to the store.
Why did Ash need to go to the store?
He said he was out of milk, bread, and eggs.
Did you take him?
I agreed to take him to the store eventually.
Ash was begging to go to the store with me.
Did you take Ash with you?
Yes, I did. Ash needed to buy food for dinner.
What did Ash make for dinner?
He made spaghetti with garlic bread.
I just got my friend a soda after I finished my shift.
That's very generous of you.
I used my friends money so it didn't cost me anything.
Why did you get them a soda?.
They were still working so couldn't get it themselves.
That's still a nice gesture.
I just had to hit a dog.
Why? That's an awful thing to do.
The dog wouldn't get out of my yard.
You could've just called somebody to get it out.
I hit the dog on its head with my rake when it was wandering around my yard.
Why did you do that?
It was an accident. I was out front raking the fallen leaves. The dog ran in front me and I ended up hitting it with the handle of my rake.
I hope the dog wasn't badly hurt.
It threw its body at me like it wants to hurt me.
I like a dog that fights back.
I was so happy to see I got an A on my paper in Science class recently.
What did you write about?
I wrote about frogs and I think the reason I did so well is because I remembered that paper Max wrote about them a few years back.
Did you copy his?
No! I just remembered what he talked about and how it was organized and tried to base my the same way.
I am glad that it worked out for you and you were able to get a good grade!
I finished my paper and got an A on it!
Congrats! How did you do that? The teacher is so strict.
I remembered this one paper he mentioned and read it thoroughly and used it as a reference in mine.
Oh genius!
I think that was what put it over the edge and got me an A.
That's fantastic to hear!
I was so happy at my baby shower yesterday.
Did you get anything special?
I had put in for a baby sheet set to match the room and my aunt bought it for us.
How sweet.
My aunt is awesome. I am so happy.
I am glad your family is so supportive.
I'm thrilled to be going to the Bahamas with my husband next week. It's been a lifelong dream of mine!
How are you affording that?
I put out a lot of requests for contributions to the trip on my wedding registry.
Wow, and you were able to raise enough money that way?
Yes, since we also got the flights at a great price.
Take a lot of pictures of your trip for me!
Do you think I am diplomatic?
That is not a word I would use to describe you.
I put out a number of gift requests.
I saw the list.
I got my wish.
Anyone would get their wish if they put out 1000 gift requests.
I was actually in this movie.
Really? What did you play in it?
I was a soldier.
Which one were you.
I was one of the many you watch die in the big battle.
Are you sure you were in this movie?
I have my first acting credit in a movie, I'm so happy.
Nice, what role did you play.
I played a soldier in the war, it's not a main character.
It's a start, soon you'll get bigger parts.
I got booked for a part in a movie.
That's awesome. What are you playing?
I'll be a soldier.
Do you know the name of the movie yet?
I cannot say the name just yet but it's supposed to be a big one.
That's so cool.
I was coming home from work last night and this old man was struggling with a bunch of grocery bags.
Did you help him?
Of course I did. He was about to fall over, poor guy.
I bet you made his day.
Well, I hope when I'm an old man someone else will help me.
You're a good man, my friend.
Some people were surprised I offered my brother a job in the new business.
Why's that?
You know, he has bounced around a lot
Are you sure you really want to trust him in this new role?
I think he is great working with the public and if it's a family thing he might put more effort into it.
Ok, that makes some sense, and he is your brother.
It's going pretty darn good at the company this month. I think we're finally turning a corner.
That's great. Are you still the only employee?
No, I decided to offer my brother a position there. I can probably get him cheap.
Yes, since he still lives at home, he can make less and not be hurt.
And I think he'll do a good job. I hope I'm not making a mistake.
I think he'll be fine. He's not a jerk or anything.
I stayed late with Quinn until he finished his project.
Was it just you that stayed?
All of Quinn's other friends had given up on him and left.
I hope Quinn appreciated you staying.
I'm determined to help my group on our school project.
Is it really that difficult to do?
I think the other guys like Quinn find it easy. But I'm kind of struggling with it.
Are they helping you out at least?
Not really. They've given up on me, but I'm not quitting.
I find that really admirable of you.
I gave someone a haircut for the first time yesterday.
That sounds like fun, who was it?
It was my friend Aubrey, she had so much hair.
Where?
It was all over her face all the time, I had to suggest cutting it.
I am glad she let you do it, it looks loads better now.
I noticed Aubrey's hair was in their face all the time.
What did you do about it?
I offered to get it cut for her.
Did she agree?
Yes and now it's no longer in here eyes all the time.
That's great news.
I'm never going to finish all this homework unless I start right now.
You didn't start doing the homework yet?
I've been too busy out having fun and I just got home.
Procrastination is never a good idea when there's important work to be done.
I know, please don't rub it in.
Mine is all done so I can help you if you want.
Sorry, I can't come over I'm trying to finish my homework.
Can't you just do it tomorrow?
No, my assignments are due tomorrow and I didn't work on it all week.
Do you think you will finish it all?
I started on it as soon as I got home today, so hopefully I can get it done.
Good luck. If you finish early, let me know.
My homework is due tomorrow and I had 3 weeks to do it.
I finished mine last week. Why did you wait so long?
I thought it was going to be easy so I kept putting it off. I started it immediately after getting home.
Well, don't let me stop you. Call me when you finish the assignment.
I wanted to tell Kendal the secret but, their were too many people there.
How were you able to pass across the secret?
I titled Kendall's head back to whisper the secret, and then proceeded to give Kendall every juicy detail.
I am sure she will find all the details interesting.
She did!
The therapist said I was addicted to collecting the stamps.
I told you that years ago, you were spending all your money on them.
I just could never have enough, I loved looking at them and touching them.
Did you do what I said and sell them?
I did, but I feel like part of my soul is gone.
You need to find another hobby that does not drain you dry and will occupy your time.
I finally decided that my stamp collection is too large.
It was getting pretty big. What did you end up doing with it?
I decided to get rid of the entire thing.
That's extreme!
It is a bit extreme, but there were so many stamps that I had to make a hard choice.
Sometimes it's best to just start from scratch.
Do you want to get dinner tonight? It's on me!
Sure, what's the occasion?
I sold my stamp collection so I'm sitting on some extra cash right now.
Whoa, really? You've been collecting forever though.
Yeah, but I had so many I couldn't even keep track of them anymore. I didn't feel attached to them anymore so I figured I'd sell.
Wow, you had some pretty rare ones too. You better be shelling out for the good steaks tonight!
I really have been putting in a lot more effort with my students lately.
What sorts of issues are going on?
Well we have been working on writing essays and they just weren't getting it so I decided to spend a lot more time instructing them on how to write a quality paper.
I am sure the students will appreciate that help from you.
I hope so. I have spent a lot of time working with them.
I can remember appreciating my instructors that took extra time with me and I bet your students feel the same way.
There were a lot of issues with the essays my students turned in today.
So what did you do?
I went over all the issues I had to make sure they understood what they could do better.
It is always good to get students aware of the mistakes they make.
Honestly they weren't that bad, it was mostly minor issues but I want them to be very good writers.
You are a great teacher, I wish I could take your class.
I hope I'm teaching the students well, I want them to do well.
How are you helping them out?
They handed in their essays, there were some problems so I discussed it in detail with them.
I hope they were paying attention to what you were saying.
I just don't understand men.
What do you mean?
I was walking out the store and there was a group of guys cat calling women.
If it was the drunks that hang around the store, I wouldn't pay them any mind.
I guess I'll let it go.
Yeah, the drunks don't know what they are doing.
I was just in there yesterday but I forgot my wallet so I couldn't buy the jacket I had wanted.  Today I went in and they had increased the price of the jacket by 15%.
What did you do?
I just left the store. I wasn't prepared to pay that much more for the jacket.
Maybe there was a sale and it ended.
There's a sale every day at that store.
Business is tough these days.
I went to that local clothes store on 35th street.
Yeah I know that place.
Well I didn't buy anything - they increased all the prices by about 15%!
Wow! I can't believe it. That's a big jump.
There are so many other cheap clothes stores. I'm not shopping there again.
Thanks for telling me: me either!
So, you know Quinn?
Yeah, wasn't he looking for a job?
Yeah, he was thinking of working as a waitress.
Yikes, didn't you do that and have a terrible experience?
Yes, it was bad. I told Quinn and he decided not to.
Sounds like your horror stories saved him from a bad job.
I know Quinn really wants to become a waitress, but I would prefer that he didn't.
Isn't that up to Quinn?
Yes, but I have had so many horrific experiences from being a waitress.
Like what exactly?
Well I have been spit upon and screamed at among other things.
Maybe if you tell Quinn then he will reconsider.
It's been interesting getting involved with the election.
I can't believe you quit your job to work for a political party.
I think this next election is a very important.
I agree, but quitting your job?
I can get other jobs, and this experience is invaluable.
Well, I hope at least some of your candidates win.
I have been trying so hard to get people to vote for my official that I'm really tired.
I cant believe you even quit your job to campaign for the elected officials.
I feel so invested in the cause I would do almost anything for them to win.
You need to take care of yourself first before you take care of others.
You're right about that.
I had to quit my job because of the ongoing campaign.
How are you going about the campaign now?
I have campaigned for many months now and persuaded many people to vote for elected office officials!
How is the turn out?
Good so far.
That's great!
I got in trouble over the Christmas period.
Why?
I hit my brother.
Why did you do that?
He was fighting with me over this new toy I got.
It's Christmas, aren't you supposed to share?
Guess what I got for Christmas?
Lots of toys, I hope!
Yeah! I got a really neat metal dump truck, but my stupid brother kept trying to take it.
Did you get into a fight?
Yeah, I grabbed it back from him and then I punched him in the arm.
Ouch! I bet he didn't like that!
Can you ask Lee to give me back my lunchbox, my mom gave that to me for my birthday?
Why did he take it?
I don't know, but I already asked for him to give it back and he refused.
You might have to go and speak to a teacher to get it back.
I just came back from the Halloween store.
Why are you wearing your costume already?
I really like it a lot and think it looks good on me.
Yeah, but it's not Halloween for a few more days.
That's okay. I think I can hustle some candy from some of our neighbours.
Or you can probably get the cops called on you.
So I stole Ash's idea and presented it at the department meeting yesterday.
Why would you do a thing like that? That's terrible!
To get back at her for doing the same thing to me last year. I would have been promoted if not for her.
You don't know that. And now you're no better than her.
I guess that's true. Now I feel bad.
You need to apologize to Ash and then tell your boss what happened. They're going to find out anyways.
I did something bad.
What did you do?
Ash gave me a great idea for this new project and I stole it.
That is really bad Ash!
I know, but I really needed to impress my boss.
Ash is going to be upset when they find out.
I asked Ash if he can give me more information about his previous idea.
Did he?.
Yes, it was a great idea too.
What was your plan with Ash's idea?
I couldn't think of a good idea myself so I stole Ash's idea.
Wow, that is unbelievable.
Thank you for coming to get me! I had to get the hell out of there.
Anytime, you know that he is bad news.
I didn't think that he was in a gang that ran guns and drugs.
Well now you know, stay away from guys covered in tattoos and have thousands of dollars on hand.
I can't believe what we just did. We are in a lot of trouble.
Neither can I. Where is your car parked?
It is down the street and we need to leave in a hurry.
Yes we do. This mess is sure to draw a crowd and have the cops looking for us.
Goodness. Lets run. I can't believe we did this.
Take your shoes off so we can move faster.
I had to jump start my car today.
It's a good thing your battery wasn't completely dead.
I thought it was though.
You might want to get it checked out.
Where can I get it checked?
Probably at a car supply store.
I am a full-fledged mechanical genius!
What are you talking about?
I fixed my car, all by myself! I am a total genius!
I don't believe it! What happened?
I left my lights on when I went into the store. Well, the big sale was on, and I had to stay in there for four hours.  When I got out, I was sure the car's battery was dead. I thought I was going to die, but then I saw this dreamy stock attendant. So, I bat my eyes at him and played damsel in distress, and he jump-started the car for me. Somehow I managed to save the day again!
You saved the day? Someday they are going to open up your skull and find less life then there is on Mars.
I thought the battery on my car was dead.
Could you get the car to start at all?
No, but when I jumped it I saw a small charge out of the battery.
That probably means the battery isn't completely dead yet.
That's what I hope, I really cannot afford a new battery right now.
If you need to borrow some money I can lend you some.
I'm sorry I'm so late. My battery died.
How did you get here then?
I was able to get somebody to help me jump my car and it worked.
That's good.
Yeah. It was able to give a small charge out of my battery.
Well, I hope you have enough to drive to the auto repair store.
I installed a new engine in my dad's car.
How did it turn out?
My dad loves the new engine.
Is the car driving good now?
It runs like new now.
You're a great mechanic. I know that your dad is happy that you helped him.
I fixed the car engine the other day.
Didn't you express a lot of doubt about being able to do it?
Yeah, but it runs like new now.
How much money did you save not going to the mechanic?
At least a thousand.
I know someone who would have fixed it for less.
It was really hard to work on this car engine.
The car runs like new now.
I'm glad I was able to fix it.
You did a really good job.
Thanks! I hope I don't have anymore of these.
I'll pay you for your time.
I feel a little bit nervous about the performance  but I have been practicing hard.
I can tell. You seem to know every line by heart.
My little sister helped me practice all this week after dinner.
That's so nice of her. Do you think you will repay her?
I think I might buy her a new videogame that she wants for her birthday.
I am excited about this performance.
You've really been busy with the stadium decor.
Yes, been busy tying these sashes all over the stadium. Thankfully this is my last one.
Good luck. I'm sure you will get a lot of calls and referrals from this decorating job. It's beautiful.
Thanks a lot! This was a huge job. Well, worth it seeing the finished product.
We'll meet up after the performance tonight for celebratory drinks.
Well it's finally time for the performance!
I know! I'm so excited.
Yeah I just finishing tying the sashes together at the stadium.
Very nice. I'm sure it looks great.
It turned out really nice.
Good for you! I am excited to see it.
Do you think these sashes look good?
Yes, I love the pattern you tied them in.
I think its going to look nice as we dance around.
Agreed, you do have a great sense of style and flair.
Thanks, I just want this performance to be perfect.
Do you know that I recently moved to a new area?
I guess not. I wasn't informed.
I do not know anyone.
I know you to be a very social person.
Yes I try my best to be! I have already established close ties in the area.
Great!
I'm finally starting to get settled into the new city where I just moved.
I'm glad to hear it. Have you met any new people?
Yeah, I've met my neighbours and my co-workers. I'm actually going out with some co-workers this weekend to a bar.
See, I told you that you'd meet people. You're an outgoing person. You just had to give it time.
I'm glad I stuck with it. Truth be told, I was thinking about moving back home if I couldn't meet anybody because it was lonely.
I'm new and it's so good that I already know someone like you.
You're so outgoing; you'll have no trouble making friends.
I'm glad you're my friend already.
What have you done to become part of the community?
I go to a local church, I joined a tennis team, and am considering a book club.
You've really gotten to it.
Do you know why my friend didn't come to my party yesterday?
I'm not sure, I did hear that they had some trouble with their car.
Oh, I thought they were just ignoring me.
Have you spoken to your friend since your party?
I did, they also said that they had issues with their car so couldn't make it, I guess I will give them the benefit of the doubt.
I believe them too.
I heard her out. She told me her side of the story and I gave her the benefit of the doubt.
Who are you talking about?
My classmate whom I suspect of stealing my notebook.
Did you confront her?
I asked if she has seen it because she sat next to me in class. She told me she hasn't, even though someone else told me she was flipping through it.
You think she's telling the truth?
Well I understand where my friend is coming from now.
What do you mean?
I thought my friend was ignoring y messages yesterday so I confronted her.
What happened when you confronted her?
After hearing her side of the story I gave her the benefit of the doubt.
Well done for hearing her out.
I can't wait to see how the eggs turn out.
What eggs are you talking about?
You know! From my chickens! I want to have farm fresh eggs.
You never told me you were raising chickens! Are you going to sell the eggs?
Well, we'll see how well I do. Or how well the chickens do I guess.
I bet the neighbourhood coyotes are excited as well.
I read some bad things about grocery store eggs.
I've heard they're not as nutritious as fresh eggs.
It's true. I grew up on a farm and our eggs were very fresh. So I went and got my own chickens so I can always have fresh eggs.
Really? You raise chickens? But you live in the city.
The city I live in allows people to raise chickens and goats, but I only got chickens.
But it sounds like you're considering goats now.
Its so great to see my chickens laying eggs every day.
How many chickens do you have?
I have 4 so far but am thinking about adding 2 more.
Can you really taste a difference between the eggs your chickens lay and store bought ones?
A little. But its not so much about taste as it is about the eggs being completely fresh.
I get that. A lot of people are raising chickens these days for the same reason. My neighbour has 2.
I didn't think it would be so hard to raise a few chickens.
They can be difficult at times.
I know, it is worth it though, I love having fresh eggs.
Nothing beats it.
You'll have to let me try one some time.
Sure I will bring some over tomorrow!
I had another customer return that new French shoe brand we are carrying.
Another, that's three this week.
I know, as I was giving them a refund, I asked them what was wrong and they said the stitching was coming loose.
I think that's the same issue with the other two.
I am going to take pictures and email headquarters so they stop carrying this brand.
Good call, maybe I'll call the other stores and see if they are having the same issue.
It's been a busy day at the shoe store today.
What have you been up to?
I had to pay a buyer back for some shoes that they returned because they no longer wanted them.
Another lost sale, that is unfortunate.
Not much I can do about that.
I thought I made a profit today.
Had you?
I had until a customer returned some shoes they purchased.
That's frustrating, why did they return them?
They said that the shoe was uncomfortable after a while.
That is a shame.
I went and stole Bailey's wallet from her pocket while she was at her locker today.
What? You can't be serious.
I am serious, she messes with me every day and makes fun of me and I am sick of it.
There are probably other ways to deal with this, you could get suspended.
I don't care, she deserves to feel like I have felt this entire school year.
Whatever happens just know that I have your back!
I volunteered for the church yesterday.
Why didn't you tell me? I really wanted to do that too.
I guess I got too excited when I heard they were going to let me draw the signs.
I know you really love art so I bet you did a great job.
Why is the train not moving.
It's stuck in this tunnel.
I'm scared.
Stop crying, it will be sorted out.
I won't stop crying, it's been a while we've been here.
Everything is going to be fine.
I am terrified! Somebody get me off this train!
Calm down Taylor, the train will start moving soon, don't panic.
I have claustrophobia and I need to get off this train now!
Just relax and take a deep breath Taylor, stop crying.
Just get me out of here, please, get me out of here!
Hey Taylor, I think the train is moving, we are finally moving again.
This train trip reminds me of a story my Mom told me about my first train trip as a baby.
Oh, what happened?
The train got stuck in a tunnel and I started crying, getting louder and louder the longer we were stuck.
Your Mom must have been so embarrassed.
She was! Nothing could shut me up until the train finally started moving again.
Well, let's hope you don't act that way today if we run into train problems.
I am really afraid, I just want to cry.
I am afraid too, tunnels scare me.
I am a baby, I am going to cry.
Don't cry, if you cry, I will cry.
I did an awesome trick at the party.
Everyone wanted to see it I bet.
Yeah they did, I did my cup trick, it's my favourite to do!
You did it for me yesterday.
Yeah I was practicing.
You need to learn more tricks.
This is the best card trick that I know, so everyone has to gather around real close.
Do you need me to do anything?
No, this trick does not involve anyone other than myself.
Wow that was such a cool trick, can you show me how to do it?
No, a magician never gives away his secrets.
But seriously you will show me how to do that right?
I went for some lunch with my best friend the other day.
That's nice, did you guys have a good time?
We really did, it was great!
What did you eat?
I had a pizza and my friend has a sandwich.
Both sound like good choices.
I'm happy to say I had a great time at lunch the other day.
Who did you go with?
My best friend, I'm really wanting you to meet him.
Sounds like a great guy!
Yes. I know he would get along with your boyfriend as well.
We've got to set up a double date!
Dang! Where did this car come from? How am I going to explain this to the insurance.
Slow down. It's going to be okay. Were you on the phone while driving? You need to be honest.
Yes, I was on the phone but I swear I was looking.
Were you also texting? I could swear you had your head down when you hit that car.
Okay. Maybe you're right.
You've got to be more careful. Next time it could cause more than a fender bender.
I can't believe I hit their car.
Are you okay?
I was looking at my cell phone while I was driving.
You should have been paying attention to the road.
The passenger was hurt but not the driver.
You are going to be sued over it.
I can't believe I ran into another car today.
How did that happen?
I was looking down at my phone because I got a text.
Did the cops know that when they showed up?
I didn't mention that but I said I was just distracted a little bit.
Well you're probably going to end up with a ticket then.
I am so tired.
Why?
I've been going door to door selling brownies since 7 in the morning.
Why are you selling brownies?
I'm trying to raise money for school. Its for a project I'm doing.
Cool. Bring some my way!
I must have walked all around town. My feet are killing me.
Yeah, selling things door to door is not easy.
It sure isn't. At least I made money.
People really do like those brownies.
Well, the money is really going to help the school. So mission accomplished.
Yes, good job. If you have any brownies left, I'll buy a couple.
Casey had the longest lecture and lesson plan today. I'm pretty sure some of the class fell asleep.
He drones on forever sometimes, but he always knows what he's talking about.
That's true. I took notes and broke it down for everyone after class because some of them were really lost.
It's good that you know him and can understand his ramblings.
Yeah, he's got a really good course, but you'll have to sit through all the stories and context to get the facts.
He's got good stories, but maybe they are more appreciated at dinner parties than in class.
So you think you can remember everything for the test?
I think I have it all down.
If you have any questions just make sure to ask me, I was able to collect notes on all of Casey's thoughts.
Sure thing, I'm sure I will do well on the test.
It took a long story to put me to sleep.
You love those long stories.
The short ones don't make me sleepy.
I feel the same way.
All I need is a long story and milk.
Milk is the best.
I'm sorry I've been busy studying lately.
I've noticed you've been working harder, any reason why?
I want to get better grades so I can go to a better school in college.
That's a good goal to work towards, maybe I should do that?
You should! We can study together.
I know I am an average student!
How can you tell?
Through my grades I am never the strongest student.
But you are doing well in class.
Yes I have really tried to increase my intelligence lately.
Good luck with that goal!
I hate getting to school this early.
I don't like being here early either. How come you are?
My mom drops me off on her way to work.
Same with my Dad.
We need to find a way to get here later.
Maybe, if we went together, our parents would let us ride the city bus.
We're always the first ones to get to school.
You're usually here before I arrive.
My mom leaves early in the morning.
Why does she leave so early?
She has to get to work at a certain time. That's why we always arrive early to school.
Oh, I see. I wondered why you're always here before me.
I was trying so hard to spare Alex's feelings, but he knows me too well.
That's the problem with good friends. So hard to deceive.
Right, so I had no choice. I had to tell him what happened.
So now he knows you saw his girlfriend with another man?
Yes, I don't think I've ever seen him quite so angry.
I guess it's best that the truth came out. For Alex's sake.
Sorry I'm kind of late today. I was helping my mom.
Helping your mom do what?
She was moving to a new house. I just helped her out.
That is really nice of you.
Yeah, but she also did treat me out to lunch.
I would have helped if I knew there was free food involved.
Wow, what a day! My mother moved into an assisted living facility. I helped her move.
Why didn't you tell me earlier? I would have been glad to help you and your mother.
Well, most of the groundwork was done, she just really needed help because she couldn't decide what to bring to her new home.
I understand. She has lived in her house since you were a little girl. We sure had a lot of sleepovers there and made some good memories.
She gave the house to me, so we'll be having more sleepovers if you'd like.
All right, sounds like a plan to me.
I really wish I could go to the concert with Ash.
Why can't you go?
I can't get the time off of work.
That is frustrating, can't you swap shifts with someone?
That's a great idea, I will ask my co-workers now!
I hope someone is free to swap shifts with you.
I got a new computer over the weekend.
That's wonderful. What was the first thing you did on your new computer?
I made an email.
Oh wow. Anything else?
I installed a few games to play.
That sounds fun!
Did you get the email I sent you?
I did not. When did you send it?
I literally sent it ten minutes ago.
Did you use your new computer?
I did, and I emailed you first thing.
That is strange, maybe check your Wi-Fi connection.
I got a new computer and sent you an email.
I didn't get an email.
I definitely sent it.
Must be in the waves.
My Wi-Fi might be broken.
That could be the problem.
Did you see the new computer that I got?
I did, that is awesome! Did you buy it with your own money?
I did! It wasn't easy to earn all that money.
What was the first thing you did when you set up the computer?
I made an email of course! What would you have done?
Made an email too!
Sydney gave me the details of the project.
Did she do the same project before?
Yes, a few years ago, so she gave some pointers.
I knew you were struggling, I hope her advice worked.
It did, I'm going to redo it from scratch.
Good luck on the project.
Then I dropped the sandwich.
You have got to hold on to what you love, my friend. Or you might lose it.
I didn't lose it. I picked it up and ate it.
Now that is gross.
I was up on the 4th bleacher and end up dropping my sandwich.
Do you go down and pick it up?
It was roast beef, I had to! I just blew off the dirt and ate it.
You can't let a sandwich go to waste.
Have you ever tasted this sandwich?
Yes, it's delicious one of my favourites.
No, I just dropped it!
Are you going to buy another one?
No, I'll just blow on it and eat it.
Smart idea.
Do you think it's okay to eat food that was dropped?
Did you eat something off the floor?
No, I dropped it on a crowd.
And you still ate it?
Yeah, I blew on it then ate it.
I suppose the blowing can help with the germs, maybe.
I asked Alex to go out with me.
That took a lot of hesitating on your part.
Yeah, it took forever just to ask her out to a movie.
When are you guys seeing the movie?
Spiderman, on its opening day.
Is that next Friday?
I had a huge crush on Alex so I asked her to go to the movies with me.
Did she go?
She did. We had such a great time. Afterwards, we went next door and got pizza.
That sounds fun. Are you going to ask her out again?
We've already made plans for next weekend.
You know how to get them.
I got hurt this morning trying to shovel the driveway.
How'd that happen?
I slipped on a patch of ice and fell.
Oh no! Are you okay?
Yes, I'm fine. My wife took care of me.
I can finish shovelling your driveway, if you want?
My back is killing me today.
What did you do to it?
I went outside last night to shovel the driveway and didn't see the patch of ice and whipped out big time.
Oh man! Did anyone else see it happen?
No, I was outside alone and there weren't any neighbours around.
Well at least you still have your dignity then.
Why did Riley have to hurt my fingers like that?
You did hit her over the head with a notebook, so maybe it is payback,
That was a joke and I did not mean it to hurt that bad!
Maybe you should apologise for hitting her to smooth things over.
That's probably a good idea, I don’t want her to hurt me anymore.
Hopefully she apologises in return.
I think I am feeling a bit better after going to the doctor.
Did he give you any medicine?
Yes, he gave me antibiotics for my throat infection.
That is great! Does it seem like they are working?
Definitely.
I am glad I started going to the doctor all the time.
That's good, doctors can help with lost of problems.
My doctor has really helped me with my leg injury.
I did notice that you have started to walk a little better.
That is right. Hopefully I will be able to move without my crutches soon.
I hope so too!
I went to the doctor because I have been feeling sore lately.
Where does it hurt?
I seem to have pulled a leg muscle.
What did the doctor do to help?
The doctor prescribed me some medicine.
You will be feeling better in no time.
I walked Taylor back home after her visit last night.
Was it late?
Yes, it was late at night and dark so Taylor was afraid to walk alone.
That's understandable.
It did mean that I had to walk back from her place to mine which meant I didn't get to sleep until very late.
That's a shame Alex, but you did the right thing walking Taylor home.
I know part of the way to get to Taylor's house, do you know the rest?
I have only ever driven the highway before, but I am sure I can figure out the back roads.
Well it's a good thing we have reception in case we need to call someone for directions!
That's a good idea! We could always GPS it if we need to as well!
I don't have GPS on my phone, it's an old phone!
Oh boy, don't worry, I do!
Taylor was very scared last night.
It's a long way for her to walk back alone.
I walked her back. She's a nice person and I didn't want anything to happen to her.
So, how was the walk?
It was a three hour walk. We hit it off and we are dating now.
Congratulations! You guys make a great couple.
I am so stressed out because I never finished my thesis.
Oh no won't that prevent you from graduating?
Yes probably and that is why I am so stressed out.
Well what are you going to do?
I don't know. I just hit a wall and couldn't get it done and now I am really regretting it.
I wish I could help you, but I have no idea how you can fix a mistake that big.
I didn't finish the thesis in time.
You're going to miss a whole lot of marks.
Yeah, it's not my fault, I hit a wall when trying to write it.
Just inform the lecturer before it's too late.
Okay I will do that, thanks for your concern.
My pleasure.
I just got new furniture and I love it.
How come, I thought you didn't have enough money?
I didn't, I got a loan and buy the furniture I wanted.
Don't you think is a bit weird to buy things when you don't have the money?
No, at all, I don't care, I wanted my furniture so I went and got it.
Well, good for you, enjoy it then.
Hey, so I finally went out to the furniture store to get new furniture for my new house yesterday. I spent lot of time in the store sitting on all the different displays trying to find the most comfortable living room set for me.
That's awesome and I'm happy for you but how did you afford that? It must have cost you an entire pay check.
Yeah, it was quite expensive and there was no way I could have paid out of pocket the entire cost, but luckily for me they had several loan options for me to choose from.
Well that's informative, maybe I'll try that soon. I need new furniture too. Was the interest rate on the loan high?
No, it wasn't too bad. I applied for two different loan options they had and qualified for them both but the second one had a much better interest rate.
I know you didn't want to take a loan out for your furniture but at least now people will have somewhere to sit when they come visit you in your new home!
Do you like the new chairs, couch and table I got?
It really goes with the house. Did you go furniture shopping?
Yeah, I've been needing new furniture for awhile but couldn't afford to do it.
Did you finally save up enough?
Not completely. I had to take out a loan to cover the cost of the furniture.
I studied all week for the test. I should ace it.
Wow! You must be really prepared then.
Yeah, I know all the answers to the practice tests by heart.
I don't think there will be any test questions on the actual exam.
I'm hoping there will be.
Did you hear that Aubrey stayed at Lee's house over the weekend?
I did, who else was with them?
I think all of Lee's family was at home too.
That was very kind of them, to let Aubrey stay.
I think Aubrey got Lee's family a gift in return.
That is nice of Aubrey.
I really enjoyed my vacation in the USA.
Good, did you stay at a fancy hotel?
I did but Aubrey stayed with Lee's family for free!
Wow, you can't beat that price!
Yes, she bought them a gift for their kindness.
That's nice of Aubrey.
Aubrey is going to buy a gift for Lee's family. They've been so nice to her, letting her stay with them.
That's a good idea. What kind of gift is she going to get?
I think she wants to get one of those small bonsai's. They love plants so I think that they would love one of those.
Oh, that's a great idea! I heard they take a lot of maintenance, though.
I gave a gift to my date last night.
You haven't been dating that long, what was the occasion?
It's her birthday tomorrow. Anyway, it was one of those globes that you turn back and forth and it looks like it's snowing.
A snow globe. Did she like it?
She didn't seemed impressed at all.
Well, it's not a great gift, or maybe she thought it was too soon for you to be giving her gifts at all.
I just put out the plates.
Are you going to call everyone down to eat?
I am ringing the bell now.
I hear it. You actually have a bell!
Yes I do. I use it all the time.
You are hilarious!
Attention, everyone, dinner!
You didn't have to ring the bell Jan, we are all here already.
But I enjoy ringing the bell!
But why ring it when you don't need it?
Because I always feel like I do need it! You guys need to be at the table when the food is still hot!
I think they are going to love the dinner.
Just ring the bell so they know that it's time to eat.
Dinner time everyone, come and get it.
Oh wow, it looks like it's a bean feast.
It's going to be a great time.
Jan this dinner is delicious.
Let me put the food down on the table.
Do you need help laying out the meal for the boys?
Could you set the table while I go and ring the bell for them?
Do you want to use the white and blue plates?
Isn't she just adorable? I have always wanted a cat!
Have you ever owned a cat before Jesse?
No, but I have always wanted one, and I always feel so bad for the ones at the animal society too!
Is that why you decided to go there to adopt a cat?
Yes, I thought it was the right thing to do and it helps out the animal society too!
Maybe you should volunteer your time to them now too!
What do you think about my new cat?
I think she's really sweet. Where did you get it?
I got her from the animal society.
I didn't even know you were a cat person.
It's the first cat I've ever owned. But once I saw her, I just knew I had to take her home
It's fine with me. I love cats.
I'm pretty sure the new cat I adopted will be a great addition to the family.
You adopted a cat ?
Correct, from the animal society, today!
Oh man that is awesome!
Bailey surprised me today.
In what way?
She showed me some kindness.
That must mean a lot coming from Bailey.
Definitely, she usually gets bullied so doesn't open up very often.
Is seems like she is trying to make some more friends.
I can tell Bailey has been bullied her whole life.
I'm sure Bailey was shocked when she found out that she was going to be safe.
I think it's a good thing that she trusts me now and that she feels safe around me.
Good, nobody deserves to be bullied their whole life because that is unfair.
I was surprised that Bailey didn't run from me today.
Don't you beat up Bailey after school is out?
Yes, but today he gave me a hug and said he was sorry I am so mean.
Why would Bailey do that?
He found out my mom died like his did when he was young. It made him feel bad.
You need to quit picking on him. He's a good person.
I watched that show that you have been telling me about for a long time.
The office on Netflix. How did you like it?
I actually liked it a lot. I ended up watching five episodes in a row and laughed the whole time.
I told you it's pretty funny. It's one of the rare shows that I actually laughed out loud at.
They have lots of seasons so I'll have a lot of time to get to know the show.
You will really love it. All of the seasons are pretty good.
Wow that was a great comedy show!
I'm glad we went even though it's not college night.
Yes, she was a great performer and I want to watch some of her YouTube skits now.
Let's plan to go out again and watch another show soon.
Yeah, how does your next week look?
I'm pretty free to go to a show any day next week.
Have you seen that new sitcom on NBC on Monday nights at 8?
No I didn't even know there was a new sitcom.
You have got to watch it when you have the chance! It was hilarious!
I'll try to catch it next week, it sounds funny.
It was funny, I haven't laughed so hard in a long time!
Well we could certainly all use a good laugh!
I'm currently managing Cameron's account while he's gone.
Is everything in order with it?
Everything's good to go, I just have to maintain it and pay off some balances.
Is this a job?
Yes I'm getting paid for it.
Good for you that you found a little side job to do.
I keep the account for Cameron.
Wow, isn't that a lot of work?
No, it's pretty easy. He just needs to pay the balance.
So do you remind him to pay?
Yes, and I do a budget sheet showing him how much he owes and all his payments so far.
And you call that easy! Easy for you maybe, math whiz.
I realized that those comments are inappropriate.
What comment? Where did you read it?
I felt really bad about it. I saw their post.
Try sending them a private message.
I will. Hopefully they will remove it.
Send me the link and I will check it as well.
I went shoe shopping today with Jesse. Never again.
Why, what happened?
She looks at every single shoe she sees. She won't stop.
Were you there a long time?
Hours! I was done in 30 minutes. It took hours to get her to leave.
I just asked Jesse to go shopping with me at the mall. I need some shoes.
Really? I thought she hated shopping.
She does, but I want to secretly get her there to help her get a dress for date this weekend.
What was wrong with her clothes?
She was going to go in some old jeans. She needs to dress up and look her best for this date with the guy she is crushing on.
Hey I'm going to the mall to get some shoes with Jesse. Want to come too?
Sure. Let's do it. Which mall are you going to?
We are going to go to the big one downtown.
Heck yea! That mall is awesome!
I can't believe I've been crowned MVP of the league!
You know, Remy, it's only what you deserve for working so hard.
No, no, everybody in the team worked hard. The difference we made was a mutual effort. I'm just humbled to work with such a great team.
You're truly a good athlete, to take that kind of attitude.
I really did not think that I deserved the MVP award by a long shot.
How can you even say that? You lead the league in RBI's, and fielding percentage.
Yes, but what about the pitcher's that killed their arms to throw one more strike out?
I mean, we could argue those types of details all day, bottom line is, you deserve it.
I may, but next year, I really want to see someone else get this award.
Yes, maybe two years in a row is going to make your head big!
I can't believe that the league made me MVP, aren't there are others who deserve this more than I do?
You're just being modest. You deserve it. You made such a huge difference.
I guess. Just doing what was necessary and stepped up my game.
There you go being modest. You've got a natural talent. Maybe now you'll get the recognition you deserve.
You're too kind. You trying to butter me up for something?
I'd never do that.
I moved back in with my parents.
I thought you could not stand living with them.
Everyone told me not to, but my parents had a talk and everything is cool now.
I'm glad that you guys are getting along.
And whatever problems are worth the free rent.
I had to move back in with my parents.
I would have let you stay with me!
I don't want to be a bother.
Anything is better then them, they treat you so bad.
No they don’t.
Bailey really they are no good for you, come and stay with me.
My headlights were on as I headed into my driveway. I saw a package on my doorstep.
Who's it from?
I don't know. I haven't opened it.
Does it have anything printed on the box?
It's a plain brown cardboard box.
Were you expecting anything?
I can't believe this blizzard! I can barely see the road.
Why are you texting and driving?
I am not. I just pulled over until the white-outs go away. I am on my street, but I do not know where.
Stay in your car! You don't want to get hit exiting your vehicle because other drivers can't see you! It's safer in your car.
Wait, wait! I can see my driveway. I am in my driveway! I can't believe I pulled into my driveway and I did not even know it! But I can see it now, and I did a pretty good job of pulling into the driveway too!
Somebody has a guardian angel that is watching out for you!
I am so glad we're finally home!
Yeah that road trip took forever to complete.
Yeah I can see the driveway right now.
Finally we are so close to being there.
I am getting the wheel prepared to make this sharp turn in.  Wow it is a relief!
I bet it feels really nice. I cannot wait to see our mom again soon!
Look! I can finally see my driveway!
Are you normally not able to see your driveway?
Not really, there are always so many cars in the driveway, that I don't recognize it!
That is silly, how does one not recognize their own driveway?
Because my husband feels the need to have every Tom, Dick and Harry over during sports seasons.
That is such a man thing to do!
I had an odd request for my mother.
What was it Sydney?
I asked her to sing with me at Rachels wedding.
Did she agree?
Yes, her and I sang together.
That's great!
I am so glad my mother and I get to do things like sing together. It is truly amazing to see how our voices react together.
I know right. It is really profound.
I think we should sing together more often.
You really should, you two have great voices.
Thank you!
No problem.
I'm glad my mother could help us with the harmony because it sounded really weak.
She loves singing right?
Yes, I had to get rid of a singer because she kept singing out of tune and was messing up the song for others so I needed someone to fill in.
Well she harmonises very well with you.
So as you can see here, we have a main loop running around the neighbourhood with the events centre in the middle.
Is this where the pool will be?
Yes, all shared amenities are there. The pool, the business centre and everything else.
And from there, the houses branch out?
Yes, the smaller houses with smaller yards are closer to the middle, and the bigger estates are further out.
I like how you kept the forest instead of tearing it down.
I've spent the last couple of days building a model of the housing estate I am developing to show investors.
You are working on a new project?
This will be huge. It's to build a huge estate. I need lots of investment.
The city is overcrowded. There's not enough housing.
There's a definitely a market for more housing. I'm trying to finish developing this by end of next year.
That would be record time with all the inspections.
I've built this model of the housing development I'm planning.
That's amazing, How many bedrooms and bathrooms will be in each?
We have two floor plans, one with 3 bedrooms and 2 bathrooms, one with 5 bedrooms and 3 bathrooms.
Have you decided on a price point yet?
We haven't nailed it down, but I'm working toward the low 200,000 range.
When do you get to show your model?
I told my dad to get the heater checked, but once again he didn't listen.
Are you going to call someone instead?
I can't, I don't even know where the heater is located, so the heater will probably break again this year.
Maybe talk to your dad again?
I guess, we will see.
I just knew that the heat would go out.
How did you know that?
It goes out every few winters.
Well, you must be cold.
It's freezing in my apartment.
Do you need a space heater?
I know the perfect hairstyle for Cameron's hair for prom.
Will it look good with Cameron's outfit?
Here is a picture. It will look great with the dress.
That's exciting what do you need to do first?
I'll begin by washing Cameron's hair.
Good luck!
I was going to style Cameron's hair for prom.
That's nice of you, what do you need to do to style it?
First of all I will need to wash Cameron's hair.
Then what?
After that I can start with the styling.
I am sure it will look great.
I am so glad we have finally made our own band.
Who is your singer?
Riley is our main singer.
What part do you play then?
I am the drummer but one day I would like to sing too
That would be great. You and Riley can sing together.
I would like to sing more instead of just being a drummer.
Why don't you tell that to Riley?
I did, but he seems to think that he's the main singer and that I am just a drummer.
Well, tell him that you would like to do more singing.
I will, that's what I'll do, tomorrow I will tell Riley that I want to sing.
That's the right attitude Sydney!
I'm really trying to impress a girl at work and I think she might like it if I start to sing more in the band.
I think you need to practice a bit more on some of your new songs to get up to the same level as Riley.
I need to get started because I don't have much time before the party gets started
You should pick up on the last song you practiced and make sure you remember the words.
Sounds like a great idea to me!
I'm the drummer in a band.
That's cool do you do anything else?
I want to sing some more.
Do you already have a singer?
Yes, Riley is our main singer.
Maybe see if Riley needs a back up singer.
I love the progress that our band has made.
You are a great drummer.
I love being a drummer. I've been playing the drums since I was a child. However, I can sing too.
You should write a song that includes both you and Riley singing.
Yes, I would like that. I want like to sing while we perform a few of our songs.
You should start writing now.
They made me angry today! I had to go down to Walmart to buy some new charcoal.
What happened to get you so mad?
Those idiots at the cookout ruined my charcoal. They dumped too much in the grill at one time!
Just calm down, ok? Don't let it eat at you so much.
They're going to have to buy me some more charcoal! They will!
I'm sure they will, but for now, just relax and enjoy the meal.
I just got some new items at the store like these bath soaps.
I didn't know you even needed some.
I didn't really. But I just had to get away from some of my roommates who made me mad.
So why are you at my place?
Because I'm going to use some of these items here. Do you mind if I use your bath?
No problem, good thing I just cleaned it.
I need to mop up the kitchen floor.
I thought you just mopped up the floor on Saturday as part of your chores.
I know, but I was playing pranks with Cameron, and I filled Cameron's shoes with dirt as a joke. He tracked dirt everywhere all over the floor.
That sounds like a funny practical joke.
I know, you should have seen his face when he realized his shoes had dirt in them.
I can imagine. I wish I had been there to see.
Oh my goodness I am so mad. I didn't mean to cross the goal line.
Why did you do that? Couldn't you tell that you was across the line?
No I couldn't tell until the end. I am so sorry. I messed up.
You sure did and you ruined it for our team.
Now I am going to feel bad for the rest of the day. I really messed up.
You shouldn't feel too bad. Mistakes happen. It will be okay.
I played football.
Did your team win?
We won because of me.
What happened?
I crossed the goal line with the winning touchdown and dropped the ball onto the ground.
You have all the right moves.
I'm done playing.
What are you doing?
This isn't for me.
Were in the middle of a game here.
Yeah well I'm done with football, I'm done with you, and I'm done with my dad
Relax man everyone is staring.
I felt so good when I crossed the goal line.
It was a tight game, we almost had you.
Maybe next time, we can take you.
We won't go easy on you this time.
I hope you play seriously then.
We will my friend, soon we will win.
Traffic was horrible yesterday.
I know. I was in it for 2 hours!
Me too! Traffic was so bad, I was late for dinner.
My kids were already in bed when I got home.
At least you had a relaxing evening after you got home. I still had to bathe my kids and put them to bed.
Aw, I'm sorry! Today will be better hopefully.
The traffic was insane today.
Was there an accident on the freeway?
Not that I saw, just a lot of congestion from people driving around.
How long did it take to get home from work?
It took an extra hour, I was late for dinner.
Maybe you should go virtual and work from home and skip the commute from now on.
Sorry I'm home late!
I was expecting you an hour ago.
Traffic was terrible. I'm lucky I got home as early as I did.
Rush hour is never the best time to get on the freeways.
I'm not used to living in such a large city, but this is really Carson's environment.
Would you like me to take you around and show you the city?
That would be amazing.
I can show you my favourite restaurants and the bars I like to go to.
Can we go tonight because I am so bored.
Sure, we can go as soon as we got off of work.
I never thought I would enjoy living in a big city like this.
Really? I thought you had always lived in a big busy place like this.
No, I come from a really small town in the South. But my friend Carson talked me into moving here after we got out of high school, so I decided to try it.
I bet this place is really very different from what you were used to, at first. How do you like it?
I have lived here for ten years and now I can't imagine living anywhere else. I don't really miss the small-town life at all.
That's great. I'm glad you love it here, because I would hate if you decided to move away and leave me all alone.
I miss my hometown so much.
I understand, the new city must be really different.
It is, Carson's environment is really different to what I am used to.
Give it a bit of time and you will get into the new place and new lifestyle.
I guess that's what I need, to give it a bit of time.
Yes, Carson's may be different, but you will be fine.
It's so strange being in a rural area.
Yeah I bet. You've always been a city girl.
Carson seems to really like it though, so I'm willing to give it a shot.
That's really sweet of you. I'm not sure I'd do that for anyone.
It's really nice at night though. I never knew there were so many stars!
Every place has its advantages.
I got really good service from the person at the car wash.
Oh, yeah? How so?
They were friendly and professional and did a good job.
I'm glad to hear that. Can you send me directions on how to get there?
I will do that. I'll give you the phone number too.
Thanks!
I ate at an amazing place today. I gave a huge tip to the waitstaff.
That's really nice of you. What was so great about the place?
The service was the best I've ever experienced. The waiters were nice, perfectly served, and practically read our minds.
That's an unusual experience these days. You're right to tip them well.
I am sure everyone does since they're so good but they deserve it.
I'm glad you enjoyed it. Let me know the name of the place.
I am a little bit more out of shape than I thought I was.
You're at the gym all the time. What makes you say that?
I was carrying wood up the hill for our campfire last night, and I was so winded! I had to stop and take a breather.
I'm sure it was just a really big load of wood.
No, it really wasn't! Just a really steep hill.
Maybe more cardio at the gym!
That seminar about the new drugs was so boring.
Well at least it's time for the reception.
I want to change my clothes and fix my makeup.
Why? You look great!
I've been wearing these clothes since 7 am.
Well now I want to change my clothes also!
My seminar for my pharmaceutical company went well.
What was it about?
Well, it was about how to present new drugs. I prepared for the reception afterwards.
Oh, that's great. Sounds like you guys know how to celebrate for sure.
Yeah. After the seminar, the reception was a great way to unwind and get to know the other people a little better.
Yes, networking too, I'm sure!
Casey made a good choice moving to a new city.  I think I am going to move as well
Where are you planning to move to?
I am planning to move to where Casey lives.
That is a great pick and a great start.
Thank you. I do my best these days.
Good luck.
I did a good deed today.
Oh really. You? A good deed?
Yeah, you know the rock show we were going to go to?
Oh yeah, the one I had to cancel on?
Yes, that one. Well I gave my tickets to a boy so he could enjoy the show. I think it's his first one.
Wow, you weren't kidding. That's really nice.
I hope that boy enjoys those two tickets.
What do you mean?
I had to spare tickets to a rock show that I am going to tonight, so I gave them to a boy who was waiting outside of the stadium.
That is very generous of you.
Hopefully they'll enjoy the show.
I am sure they will!
I ordered a bunch of stuff online and here's a big envelope. I wonder what it is.
Tear it open and find out! I love getting packages in the mail.
Dang, it's not even for me. I just assumed it was since I ordered that stuff.
I know you wouldn't order that. It must be your sister's.
I'm going to hide it from her until she gives me my money back.
Oh boy what is in this package!
Don't rip it open too hard or you will ruin what is inside.
Don't worry I've got steady hands.
Yeah that's not what you said last time.
Well because I used a knife last time to open the package.
Alright well I trust you this time then.
This was the first time in years my family and I had gone out together.
What was the special occasion?
There was a party we were invited to, so we went out together to eat.
That sounds like a nice family trip;
I went out to eat with my family this past weekend. It was a lot of fun.
Oh really, what was the occasion?
It was my grandfathers 80th birthday party!
Oh wow, happy birthday to him!
Thanks! We had a party and everything.
I really enjoyed the restaurant we went to.
Where did you go, to the steakhouse?
No, the seafood place. They have a dance floor there.
Oh right. I forgot this was your brother's birthday celebration.
Yeah. Nothing like an 18th birthday party.
Yeah, I'll bet it brought back some memories for you.
This past weekend was a lot of fun.
What did you do?
I went out to eat with my family for a party.
That sounds like fun.
It was. The party had a lot of alcohol.
I think that's the only way I could spend a lot of time with my family as well.
Cameron's father asked me to come outside with him for a chat.
When was this?
Last weekend, I stayed at Cameron's for dinner with his father.
What did he want to chat about?
He just wanted to ask some questions about how Cameron is getting on.
I wonder why he wouldn't just chat to Cameron.
Cameron's Dad was so anxious and wanted to ask me some questions about him!
He probably is missing him already.
Yes! I went out with him to talk.
He should be happy now?
I guess.
The games on my phone distracted me from the class. The teacher was covering topics that were on the exam and I didn't care.
When did you become such a horrible student?
The day I discovered gaming.
Did your teacher catch you playing games?
Eventually he caught on but it took him a while. I hid my phone underneath my desk.
You are such a trickster.
This game on my phone is really a lot of fun.
Shouldn't you be paying attention to the teacher.
I can hear her a little. She's talking about topics that's going to be included in the exam.
Yeah, but what kind of topics?
You're really ruining my enjoyment here.
Just don't ask to copy my answers for the exam.
This game is so exciting!
Why are you playing? Our teacher is talking about our next exam. You should pay attention.
But I am in the middle of a game you can just tell me about it later.
The hell I will. You are not paying attention so prepare to face the consequences.
It's okay. I will worry about it later. This is very interesting.
Okay, I'm just telling you. Don't tell me I didn't warn you.
I think I'm going to fail this exam.
Did you not study for it?
I don't even know what topics I have to study.
How do you not know what to study?
I wasn't paying attention to my teacher in class, I was playing games on my phone.
I don't think you should use your phone in class anymore.
I've never went on a date with someone I'd call a stranger before, that I also really liked.
Didn't you chat with them online extensively?
Yeah, but we've only met online. I've never seen him in person.
Did you feel like you were taking a huge risk?
No, I felt more like that when we were chatting.
Yeah, people can turn nasty quickly while chatting if they're somewhat anonymous.
I don't really know them that well.
How do you know them though?
We met online through a chat forum.
The chat forum for role playing as wizards?
Yeah, but we became more than role play friends.
Okay.
I need your advice about something.
Of course. What is it?
I've been speaking to this guy online and I like him a lot.
Have you met him in person yet?
No I'm nervous but I do like him a lot.
I think it's worth a shot if you like him.
I hope I can get to know my online friend better by speaking to him more.
You talked to him more online?
We met playing video games and he seemed pretty nice so we met up.
It seems like you like him, I hope things work out for you guys.
I like this guy so much. We have only chatted online and video chat, but I  know he's the one.
Sounds like you are really serious about him. How does he feel?
I know he likes me too. He wants to meet as soon as he is in the area.
I hope it works out between you two.
I wish Bailey was more responsible. She's late for work.
You said she was leaving and I see she's getting ready for work.
Well, as I said she's late and her boss will be unhappy.
You think she might lose her job?
I hope not. It will be tough finding a new job right now with the economy and all.
Let me know how I can help at all.
Bailey's about to leave.
Why so?
He has work soon.
Where does he work?
Home Depot I think.
I finally got Jan to go to sleep.
Was she having trouble sleeping?
Yeah, she was even though she was so tired.
How did you finally get her to sleep?
I just forced her eyes shut.
I guess that's a good way to really make somebody go lights out.
Jan was so tired last night but couldn't sleep.
That's awful, I hate it when that happens to me.
After I while I gave up and just decided to force Jan's eyes closed for the night.
Well I guess you had good intentions, but did it work?
I think so, after a while I fell asleep myself so I am not sure.
What a long night for you both!
Jan was so tired but wouldn't go to sleep.
Did you do anything to help her sleep?
I tried a few things but nothing was working.
Did Jan fall asleep in the end?
She did after I forced her eyes closed.
That is one way to do it.
I'm looking forward to my date. I'm getting ready to head out.
Have fun tonight. I'll be sitting home bored out of my mind.
We are going to the new burger restaurant. They have the best fries.
That sounds delicious. Bring me back some fries.
I don't know if I'll be back tonight. I want to see her naked. Tonight might be my lucky night. That's all I can think about.
I'm sure you'll be back. You're just taking her to get burgers and fries. Not much motivation for getting naked.
I have the best idea for my date tonight.
What are you going to be doing?
The only plan I have is to eat fries and see my girlfriend naked.
That doesn't sound like much of a plan
Well we will eat dinner and then go home.
So it could possibly work out for you.
I know it's strange but I love looking at her naked and eating French fries.
That is highly unusual Taylor.
It might be but it gets me in the mood and calms me down.
Whatever floats your boat buddy
You're telling me you don't like French fries?
Oh no, I love French fries it's the rest of the stuff and how you combine them.
This has been really hard for me, but I know I have to do it.
Why has it been hard?
Well, I had to leave the one person who I've ever loved here in San Francisco. I don't know if I'll ever find anyone else.
You will, I know it. It's really a difficult decision, but if you need anything just let me know.
Thank you. I know you'll be there for me. I have to go get on the train now - it's about to leave.
Good luck! I'll be waiting to hear from you.
My heart feels broken. I don't know how I can go on.
You'll be okay. It'll be easier when you're out of the city.
I guess so. Saying goodbye is very hard, though.
It should be hard. If it were easy, then it wouldn't mean anything.
I guess. I feel like it's not over though, like we'll see each other again.
You probably will because you both want it so badly. It'll happen.
I will never forget the love of my life.
What is happening between the two of you?
I am leaving her. I have to follow my dream and that means I have to leave San Fransico.
That is sad, if it is true love I am sure you two will find each other again.
I can only hope, but for now my focus is on my dream.
Goodbye Austin and good luck.
I can't drive you to work today. I need to pick Jesse up from the doctor.
What is wrong with Jesse?
He was feeling light headed and couldn't stand on his own. So I drove him to the walk-in clinic.
Did they find out what was wrong with him?
I don't know yet. I couldn't stay because I'm not allowed in the office so I am picking him up when he calls me.
Let me know what they say when you know. I can find a ride to work. No problem.
I had to take Jesse to the doctor.
What's wrong with him?
We are still waiting on the results to come back.
He is taking tests?
Yes to see what's going on.
Hopefully it comes back good.
I ended up becoming infected with the virus.
Have you been taking your vitamins?
Yes, I always do. It's the best treatment since there is no pharmaceutical cure.
Get lots of rest too.
Definitely. I've also cut out all junk food and have been eating well.
That's great and should help keep your immune system in top shape.
I am spooked.
What has happened to you?
I became infected with the new virus.
Oh that is very bad.
There is no cure for virus diseases.
Hang in there because they are working on developing a cure.
I need to win the game.
You can just do the best you can.
I will do whatever it takes.
Just make sure you abide by the rules.
I don't care about the rules. I don't care about being a bad person.
That is so wrong.
You know, I'm getting tired of being a doormat.
You're a nice and thoughtful person, what's wrong with that?
Plenty. Things are about to change. No more Mister Nice Guy.
What are you going to do?
I'm going to claw my way to the top no matter who I have to step on to get there.
That sure isn't like you at all! I'm not sure I like the new you!
Today was another usual day in my neighbourhood.
Seeing people shopping, going for a walk and cars driving along the busy roads?
And also, as usual a bunch of homeless people panhandling.
Did you end up giving them any money?
I did. They always come up with some sob story and I fall for it every time. This is what I get for being compassionate and sympathetic.
It also helps to put things in perspective. Realize how good of a life you're living compared to others and be thankful for it.
When I was going down the street the other day I saw three homeless guys sitting there and I felt so bad.
I hate that. I always feel so guilty.
I had five bucks in my pocket so I gave it to them.
That's really nice of you. What did they say?
They were super grateful and kept thanking me. I wish everyone would help more.
Me too. I try to when I can.
I hate it when those pan handlers are all up in your face on Main Street. It happened to me again today.
Again? That is the third time this week! What is it about you that makes you a magnet for these creeps?
I don't know. I try to be nice to them. I even gave them more money today than I did the last two times, and that did not make them go away.
You gave them money? What are you, nuts?
They looked hungry. They wouldn't take checks though, so I had to pay in cash.
Friend, if you keep giving them cash, they are never going to leave you alone!
We really crushed it today in this new video game. I am so glad that I got on this elite team.
I am so proud of you for doing so well.
Thanks. Our team always wins any competition.
That is cool. You must be the best group. I can't believe I know some one so important.
We have accomplished our mission.
Does that mean you defeated the enemy?
Yes we won the battle.
You are the best soldier and officer of the team.
It was a tough battle.
I am just glad you are home.
Riley seems so naive so I had to educate her.
What is she naive about?
She thinks her boyfriend is going abroad for school and is going to remain faithful to her.
Some do.
I told her most likely it's not going to happen. He'll be there for a couple of years.
That's a long time to be away.
I think I'm giving up on Riley right now.
What happened?
I try my best to educate them but it's like they didn't hear anything I said.
They did here or they didn't care?
I think it's the latter, so I'm giving up
I'd feel the same way if it happened to me.
Remy is a good tutor.  She just explains things in a way that I understand.
That's great that you are getting help.
She drew an analogy on the board and it just makes sense to me.
Some people are good at making sense of complicated problems. That's why Remy is a tutor.
I feel fortunate to have found her. My mom found her actually on an online board.
I hope she'll help you improve your grades.
Remy has helped me out a lot in math.
Who's Remy? I need help in math too.
He's my new tutor and he's helping me do better in all my subjects, but especially math.
Does he cost a lot? I need to tell my mom.
Remy is expensive, but worth it. He gave me an analogy to help me with some algebra. I aced the test.
I'll talk to my parents about Remy, because I need a lot of help.
I just loved all of the art so much! It was so fun to look at.
Who was the artist?
The amazing Alex.
Oh I've never seen his stuff.
You should look into it it's amazing.
I will it sounds like he is awesome!
I just spent the last few hours at the art gallery.
Did you see any good art work there?
I saw art work from the amazing Alex.
Is that why you spent so much time there?
Yeah. I was so fascinated by his work.
I might have to go and see what all the fuss is about.
I went to the Art Gallery today.
Cool! How was it?
I had a good time. I spent hours there looking at the different pieces.
Must have been nice!
Yeah it was. I even was able to see the work of art by the amazing Alex.
So cool!
I took my dog to Central Park yesterday.
That's a good way to get some exercise.
No kidding. The walk turned into a run pretty quick.
Dogs aren't going anywhere, but they get there fast.
We ended up on the East Side, I live on the West.
East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet.
Can we push lunch for like 15 minutes? I need to shower.
Oh yeah, no worries. I'll just let Marty know we'll be a little late.
Cool, thanks. I took the dog out for a walk since it's so sunny but we stayed out longer than I expected.
I feel so guilty taking them back in when they're so happy outside!
I know! I couldn't break his little heart like that.
Marty will understand. He loves dogs too.
I've been exercising more since I got my dog.
You look great, like you have lost a few pounds.
Yes, about 10 pounds. I always walk on nice days.
Maybe I should get a dog.
You should. It's a nice way to get and stay active.
I'm going to the pound right now.
It is a really nice and beautiful day today.
Yeah, what do you think you are going to do with the day?
Well, I would like to hang out with my dog, because I love hanging out with him.
Oh, that's a very good idea.
Yeah, but I also wanted to get some exercise, so I am thinking I'll take him for a walk.
Oh, a walk is a great way to combine both.
I took my dog out for a walk.
I needed exercise as well!
It's a bit overwhelming with the humidity.
Walks a re great for exercise though.
Yeah that's why I wanted to take my dog out.
Sounds like you both had a good time.
I went to the shelter today, and guess what? I have a new furry friend.
Oh my gosh, what kind of animal is it?
There were lots of sweet animals there and it was a hard decision, but I finally decided on a ginger cat.
I love ginger cats, they're so cute. What's its name?
His name is Cheddar.
That's adorable! I can't wait to come over and meet him.
I can't believe I finally got to pick out my own pet!
Did you end up going to the local pet shelter?
Yes I did, and I picked out the prettiest little ginger cat ever!
That is awesome! I don't know if I would be able to pick just one!
Oh believe me, it was not easy, I was there for a while!
I believe it, all those poor animals! I'm glad you got one though!
I brought a small ginger cat home from the local pet shelter around the corner.
You are a cat lady now.
Not quite. I only have one cat but I might be adding more.
No one I know who has cats, has just one cat.
That's true. My friends have like a half dozen. They are hard to keep track of.
You'll be a cat lady soon enough.
Who did this? I was holding on to this bottle for a reason.
Oh sorry, that was me. Its recycling day.
But this bottle has an interesting shape that I can incorporate into my school project.
Isn't it a painting project? Why the bottle.
Yes, but my painting will stand out in 3D.
Oh sounds creative but make sure you recycle the bottle when you are done.
This is the bottle I needed.
That water bottle that was in the trash?
Yes, I was going to use it in my art project.
Oh I see, why though?
You see the shapes in it? I was going to cut it up and use in for a project.
No I see! That could be interesting.
I really don't feel like cleaning the apartment and my friend keeps leaving me notes to tidy up!
Do they ever clean up.
Yes, they do it all the time so I figured they liked cleaning.
You are being really selfish, it's probably your turn.
I guess, but I would prefer they ask me to my face rather than through notes.
You should really talk to your friend about this.
I had to give the ball back to the pitcher after I picked it up on the field.
You should've pitched it yourself.
Unfortunately couldn't do that. I had broken my wrist.
I am sorry about that. I hope your wrist will heal quickly.
I think I injured my arm at the game.
How did you injure it?
I don't know, but I caught the ball and couldn't throw it so I ran it over to the pitcher.
You should get your arm checked out.
The pitcher threw the ball so far.
How far did it go?
It went beyond second base.
Did you catch the ball?
I caught the ball and ran it back to the pitcher.
Good job. You're a great baseball player.
I have to get the ball back to the pitcher before it is too late.
I know right. I am crazy about baseball too.
You need to stop talking and throw the ball back to the pitcher, here give it to me and I will run it to the pitcher instead.
Here you go.
I have to sprint!
Good luck!
Did I tell you what I did the past weekend?
No, what did you do, Jan?
Well, since I moved to NYC from Detroit, I have been missing my sister and brother. So I went back to Detroit to visit them for a few days.
That had to be exciting! I bet you surprised them.
I did! It just felt great getting to see them again, I've missed them so much.
Hopefully you all went out to a nice dinner, too.
I have missed my family for too long now.
It must be hard to live so far away from them.
It is, but now that I am home I am going to visit them.
I am glad to hear that, I bet you have a lot of catching up to do.
We do, its been about 2 years since I saw them.
That is a long time!
I decided to go see my cousins over the weekend.
Isn't that a really long drive?
Yeah but I really miss them being here.
It sucks when family moves away so I understand.
I wish I got to stay with them longer.
Maybe they can come visit here over the summer.
That was a fun time going to the carnival with everyone wasn't it?
It really was. I'm glad we got to do it.
Same here, it was such an awesome time. We all made a lot of memories together.
Yeah and don't even get me started on those funnel cakes they were absolutely amazing.
They really were, I cant believe my Mom came to the carnival with us too.
She looked like she had a great time.
Hi, that's my mom over there at the funnel cake vendor. Wave at her.
Sure, I was just thinking about going to get something to eat. A funnel cake sounds good.
I have to go back so she doesn't feel left out. Come on over if you decide to get one.
I sure will and I'll tell some of the others, too.
Okay, I'll see you then. Tell the others hi for me!
I can't get over Kai.
You have to get over it. You can't get him back.
I know, but it just hurts so much.
We all have to deal with pain. It'll get better over time.
We did everything we could do on the operating table to save Kai.
Don't be too hard on yourself.
It's never easy when you lose someone's life on the table.
You can't think of it as you losing their life.
I know, but it' just the nature of the job.
Try not to dwell on it too much is that's not good for your mind.
I can't believe what happened to me today.
This doesn't sound good, what happened?
I lost a life for the first time as a doctor today.
I am so sorry! Who did you lose?
Kai, who had been under my care for weeks, passed away.
I'm sure you did all you could. Take your time to feel better.
I can't believe she's really gone.
I understand, Cameron, but you can't blame yourself.
I do though. It is my fault that Kai lost her life.
You did everything you could, Cameron. It is not your fault.
It certainly seems like my fault. I miss Kai.
I miss her too, but you didn't make it happen.
I was driving home late at night and saw something on road. As I got closer I realized it was a deer and it was dead.
That's so sad, I hate whenever I see roadkill.
It was hit by a car as it was crossing. It was just in the middle of the road.
Did you call anyone to tell them to remove the deer?
I called the police. They said they would take care of it.
Poor deer.
Are my eyes red?
Yes, they are. What happened?
I was crying on my way to school.
Crying about what?
I saw a dead deer in the road and it made me sad.
Oh, that's awful! I'm sorry Kendall.
It was not easy, but it was attainable which is all that I needed.
So how did you end up convincing the king to let you go free?
It all comes down to money with these people.
So you offered him money? He's a king, doesn't he have all the money he wants.
No, not money, jewels. I offered him jewels, which was his weakness.
That is extremely smart of you!
I was in a tough spot.
What happened to you?
The king would not let me be free.
What did you do?
I put some jewels in front of the king to entice him to free me.
You are here so I see your bribe worked.
I am finally home!
Yay! It's so good to see you again! Where were you all this while?
I was imprisoned by the mad king
What? That's unfortunate, so what did you do that caused him to free you?
I put my precious jewels before him and sang his praises to entice him to free me!
I am so thankful that I am finally free.
How did that even happen again?
I literally had to place some diamonds in front of him.
Oh, the diamonds that you had mined?
Yes, and thankfully that worked.
I am so beyond glad right now for you.
You really want to hear the story
You know i do! You've been teasing me about it for days
well it does get a bit raunchy, sure your catholic ears can handle it
I'm a big girl Tracy just spit it out
Ok last chance to back out
No tell me now
Anytime I get to tell one of Sydney stories I have great time
She is such an amazing writer.
For someone that young to have a grasp of writing like that, it's amazing.
I need to get some pointers from her.
We all can use some.
When is the next reading?
i am so glad you told me that story it sounded amazing
i couldn't wait for you to hear it because i knew you would love it
so she spilled a whole gallon of paint on her head when she was on the ladder?
it was hilarious and i wish you would have seen it
I had dinner with Quinn.
How did that go?
He would not let me treat.
He refused your offer?
I couldn't convince him to let me pay so I secretly put cash into his pocket.
He will be surprised when he empties his pockets.
Quinn kept on insisting she pays for dinner.
What did you do?
I put money into her pocket and refused.
So she earned money from her insistence?
No, that was more of a joke to stress she really didn't have to pay.
So she let you pay after returning the pocket money?
i snuck money in Quinn's pocket when she wasn't looking
Quinn is so nice I don't think she ever let someone even attempt to pay for dinner
i just feel bad for her because she thinks she always has to pay for everything
she is really rich so I don't think she cares that m much about money though
you're probably right I guess
I didn't think I would ever find these keys,
Where did you find them?
I put them on a chair outside after I opened the door.
I bet you were searching all around inside the house and never thought about outside.
If you've bet, you would've won money.
Something similar happened to me a couple weeks ago.
I have been running around like a chicken with her head cut off.
What is the problem?
I was just holding my keys and now they’re gone.
Check the places you have been to.
I went back to the car, and there I found the key right in the ignition.
I'm so glad you found it.
Sorry I'm late. I couldn't find my keys.
Where were they?
After searching for over an hour I found them still in the front door.
I've done that and now that is the first place I check.
I was driving myself crazy trying to retrace my steps.
It happens. Everybody has misplaced keys.
I just signed up for some community college classes. I am so exited.
Which classes are you taking?
I am taking some culinary lessons
You've got the talent for that.
I know. I intend to apply for a job when I have finished.
Wise of you to think of self-improvement.
I really hope that all this studying helps me to find a job.
We both worked so hard and took all the required courses at college.
Yes, we should have no trouble finding good jobs. We worked really hard.
We should start filling out applications tomorrow.
Yes, let us  start submitting applications early so that we can find a job faster.
Wonderful! I am ready when you are.
You know I've wanted to get a job in computer programming, right?
Yes, I knew that was something you were interested in.
Well, I took some classes at community college and I learned so much.  I've been applying for jobs and I think I'm going to get at least one offer in the next week or so.
That's great.  I know it's something you've really wanted to do.
I think it's really going to allow me to live independently.  I should earn enough to be able to get my own place.
That's amazing.  Let me know and I'll help you move!
I hate it when I waste food.  I ordered more than I could eat and had to throw the left over away.
Could you have saved it for later?
I was on my way to a meeting and there was no place for me to keep it.
That happens.
Next time I won't order as much.  If I am still hungry, I can always buy more to eat.
That's so true.
I really didn't know we had that many things on the table!
We ordered way too much food.
Yeah, sorry to let it go to waste.
Next time we should be more thoughtful and also take some of it home.
I'll be sure to think twice about ordering everything off the menu.
Okay, we'll keep that in mind next trip to this place!
I feel so guilty today.
What do you have to feel guilty about?
I was at a restaurant for lunch and ordered more than I could eat.
Did you get a doggie bag?
No, I just left it there. I'm so wasteful.
Usually you take your leftovers home with you. What made today different?
My kids always wanted to go to the beach so i took them to the beach.
It must really be fun at the beach!
Yes! while i was exploring, i found a crab in the sand
Did you pick it up?
Sure i did.
I hear a crazy sound!
Where are you?
I'm in a big city currently!
What city are you in?
I'm in Chicago right now.
I love their pizza.
I'll admit being in the city is a new experience for me.
Sure. It can be a bit of a culture shock for the uninitiated.
Yeah, it was for me. I found myself jumping at every little sound.
That's funny. You must have been a nervous wreck.
I was. At one point, I could've sworn I heard a gunshot. It was just a door slamming.
Well, don't kid yourself. One of these days, it actually could be a gunshot.
I am so stressed out this week!
What's going on?  Are you okay?
I'm fine.  I just have all these deadlines coming up for work.  I'm new so I don't want to mess anything up.
Work stress is the worst!
Is there any chance you could watch my son for a couple of hours so I can get some extra work done?
Of course!
Do you think you could help me acclimate to my new job since you are a higher up manager?
Of course, what do you need to know?
I need to know all of the different tricks that people use to do their jobs effectively and efficiently.
Ok, I can set up an appointment with you for every day after work in my office if you want.
That would be great, thank you so much.
No problem, anything for a friend.
There is no way I could handle the project they gave me at my new job. I am in way over my head!
It's a new job. Give yourself some time. You'll get the hang of it.
Well, I had to ask for help to get this thing done on time. I feel like a failure.
You're not a failure. Everyone needs some help when they are getting started.
My boss didn't seem to mind, but I really wanted to impress her with this project, and I don't think I did.
You'll have other projects. You can't always start right out of the gate the winner. You'll get there.
Alex stayed home and did not go to school.
I hope he was not sick.
When I left for work he was sick.
How was he when you returned home?
By the time I returned home from work he was better.
Time heals all wounds.
It looks like you're doing much better, Alex.
Yes, i got to sleep almost all day.
It was a good thing you stayed home and did not go to school.
How was work?
It was okay. I'm glad you're feeling better.
Thanks, I need the rest.
I did something wrong today.
What did you do wrong this time?
Cameron caught me stealing at work and reported me to my boss.
You are in trouble then.
I will find out tomorrow what my boss has to say.
I hope he forgives you or you're out of a job.
Hey...Did you talk to our boss about me recently?
I did Aubrey, I saw you taking things from the supply closet.
Ah come on Cameron! It was just some paper.
That's company property!
You're so stuck up. This is why nobody invites you to things.
I'm just doing what is right!
I kind of feel bad about telling my boss about Cameron stealing.
I don't think you should feel bad about that.
She's still my friend. But I feel like she needs to learn.
I think she's going to learn from this.
I'm just happy my boss didn't call the cops on her and just left her with a warning.
I hope she's still your friend after this.
Do you know why my boss is so mad at me?
I am sorry to be a tattletale, but I saw you steal something from the supply room and I told your boss
You did what? For your information I stored my snack in the closet and that's just what I got out of it
Oh no, I am so sorry but I thought that was part of the office supply.
Better take that back, because even if he reviews the camera. He will know I am innocent.
I am so sorry. I will be sure to correct my mistake. I hope you forgive me
I'm working double shifts right now
You are getting paid for it right?
I haven't seen a pay check yet but that should come next week.
You better make sure they're paying you for this.
If not, I need some huge bonus at the end of the year
It doesn't matter if it's today or then, just get paid.
Oh, what a gruelling couple of weeks!
I know! You've been working yourself way too hard!
Yeah, these double shifts are killing me, but there's no other way to get everything done on time.
Why is that so important?
It'll enable our company to grow internationally; we've been working towards this for a long time.
Wow, you sure are dedicated! They're lucky to have you!
I've been working double shifts at work lately. I'm exhausted!
Why are you working so much? Do you need more money?
No, I'm just trying to get everything done on time because the business is getting bigger and bigger. We might even start franchising soon.
You mean open up companies in other states?
We're actually planning on expanding internationally. That's why I've been working so hard lately.
I am so glad to be back home! That car crash really had me bent out of shape.
I'm glad you recovered well, and finally got out of the hospital!
Me too! That place was not a good place to rest, but it was nice being tended to.
I can never sleep in the hospital with all the lights and people constantly coming and going.
You're telling me! I can't wait to crawl into my own bed tonight, and sleep.
Get some rest, and call me if you need anything.
I was seriously injured after the car crash
Ohhhhh!!!!! i am sure you are recovering.
Yes! I just came back after spending 2 weeks in the hospital.
I wish you good health very soon.
Thank you.
It feels so good to be back!
I bet! Are you ok, man that was some car wreck you were in!
I know right, but yeah I am much better, I can't believe I spent two weeks in that hospital just laying there, healing
At least you are here and good and alive!
True, I need to be more careful when I am driving, the crash was my fault.
Yes you do, this all could have been avoided had you been paying better attention to the road
We need to get mom something since she is not feeling well.
You should get a get well soon card.
That's a good idea I am going to drive to the store right now.
Okay show me what card you end up getting.
Okay, thanks for the help.
Your welcome see you later.
Did you like the lecture Remy
I didn't just like it, I loved it
I'm glad you did, I worked hard on it
it really opened my eyes up to the book, I didn't see it that way before
a lot of people tend to miss the small things
The author was really going for something there wasn't he
Remy never understood the book in class!
How was Remy able to understand the book?
I gave a brilliant lecture that that deepened her understanding of the book.
OH! you should consider becoming a professor!
I think Remy has a clear idea of what to do now.
He seemed confident after your brilliant lecture.
Do you really thought it was brilliant?
Oh yes, it was a really good lecture.
I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Remy was happy, he finally got the book we were studying in class.
How do I send you the document?
You can send it as a pdf.
What is a pdf?
I will send you the instruction, check you email.
Alex, send it in PDF format.
I still don't understand how to send it to you over email.
You can make an attachment to the email.
I still don't get it. I know what a PDF is, but I don't know how to attach it.
Go to your email you are composing. Do you see the paperclip? That's for adding an attachment.
I see it. That makes sense, a paperclip. I'll send the email right now with the PDF attached. Thanks!
It's been such a long day at work. I just got home from driving 15 minutes ago.
Time to relax. What are you doing tonight?
Probably just curl up on the couch and watch that whatever is on tv.
Sounds like a plan, but add a pizza and beer and you have a perfect night.
I'm so tired from working 12 hours today.
you sure have worked a lot of hours this week are you saving up for something
I'm want to take a nice trip this summer and go away for a little bit
sounds like it would be a really good time
you should start saving up money if you want to go with me
sure, i will start working overtime too.
I am driving home now, I really can't wait to watch Survivor.
Did you see what happened last week and who got kicked off?
Yeah, it was John right? I really didn't like him anyway, he was a snob.
I completely agree, I am super excited for the show tonight.
I just got home and am turning it on now, talk to you later!
See you soon!
The interview process was absolutely exhausting.
You've been at it all week!
But I finally chose someone new to hire that met all of the rigorous qualifications my company has for new people.
I hope the new hire works out.
He had great recommendations, so I'm expecting a lot out of him.
This has been a long week!
Me too, why was yours long?
I finally found a candidate for the sales position after interviewing over 20 people this week.
I think people are nervous about working on commission these days.
I agree, but holding out finally paid off because this woman is going to be very successful.
Sounds like we should celebrate then!
i think i can start a blog with all this information i read this week
you have spent all your time reading blogs this month i would hope you would
i even followed about fifty influencers to see what they say
it looks like you got a head start and know what youre doing
i think i will be pretty successful
I opened a stand.
Where? What do you plan to sell?
At the local art festival.
I will promote your store to our colleagues.
I wanted to make some sales.
Hopefully they will all buy.
I have a stand at the local arts festival.  I want to sell some art.
Is this still open this weekend?
Yes this is the last weekend though.
I'll come by and check out your art.
Cool.  There's a variety of things people are selling.  The stand next to me sells purses.
I love purses.
Hush little baby don't say a word.
Are you putting the baby down for a nap?
Yes I kept her up all night hoping she would nap.
She looks tired.
She is, I don't know why she fights her sleep so much.
Babies do that sometimes.
Here you go, you can pay me back tomorrow.
I really appreciate it. Do you want me to send it on Venmo now?
I don't have Venmo, but can you bring cash next time?
Sure, no problem. I'll go to the ATM on the way home from school.
Got it, that works.
Thanks for spotting me, though, that was really helpful!
Why are you eating lunch?
I forgot my lunch money at home
Oh my, why didn't you say so? Let's get some food for you.
I don't want to bother you. I can wait till I get home.
That is no problem! You can pay me tomorrow.
Wow, thank you! I promise to give it back.
I got a haircut from Casey today.
The hair cut looks good.
He has a lot of clients now at the barber shop so I had to wait a little.
He's putting his skills to good use, maybe I'll go to Casey for my haircut too.
Did you know Casey works at a Barber shop?
I didn't know that.
He's pretty good at cutting hair too, he cut mine yesterday.
Where is the shop at?
It's on Lane Drive.
I'm going to have to check it out this weekend.
Casey is a really good barber.
Is this new haircut Casey's work?
Yeah, Casey cut it at Dave's barber shop.
Is Dave about to retire now?
I heard Dave is going to work for another two years.
Those last two years can seem the longest.
Casey thanks for cutting my hair today, I didn't even realize you worked here
Yep I started working here last month after the old barber shop closed down
Well you did a great job, I will definitely be back
I appreciate that! I need to build up my customer base for this area
I am sure you will do fine, I will be spreading the good word!
Awesome thanks again and come again!
I just got a great haircut.
I can see, I really love it, where did you cut your hair?
Do you remember Casey?
Yes I sure do
Well he works at a barber shop and he cut my hair.
Can you tell me which one? I want to go there.
Originally I was only going to do this every once in awhile. But it's such important work.
You're really making a difference. You're changing these children's lives by finding them places to live.
It's true. And I'll be honest, I've never felt happier and more rewarded.
They say the best thing you can do for yourself is to help somebody else.
Yeah, I always thought that was just a slogan. Turns out it's true.
See, I like that. Everybody ends up happy: you, the children, everyone.
I just feel bad about all those children without a home.
Sounds like you have a big heart.
I don't know about that but I do like to help them and provide shelter.
You are an admirable person.
I think we should all help.
I agree but its hard sometimes.
There's been a fly around here that's driving me nuts. Help me get it out of here.
Sure, they drive me nuts, too. Where is it?
It's over there. I want to shoo it out the door.
I'm glad you don't want to kill it. Get a piece of paper or something to make it go towards the door. I'll hold it open.
Wow, that was easy. I can't believe we did it on the first try. Thanks for your help.
Any time. I'm glad I could help.
i was hungry in the morning and wanted something to eat
were you able to make something then
yes i made scrambled eggs
scrambled eggs are quite nice
What will it be, scrambled eggs, French toast, waffles, pancakes, oatmeal, grits, cereal or hash browns?
I'm not hungry.
I am really hungry in the morning.
Why not make scrambled eggs, French toast, waffles, pancakes, oatmeal, grits, cereal and hash browns?
I'll make scrambled eggs.
Make me some coffee.
i had a good breakfast today
what did you eat?
i had some scrambled eggs
i thought you didn't usually eat breakfast?
i don't but today I was hungry
oh i see
I felt so hungry this morning.
Was it because you skipped dinner last night?
I don't know, but I ate four scrambled eggs.
Did you only eat one type of food for breakfast?
Yeah, and drank some water.
I'm telling you, you eat meals and specific foods in spurts.
I made scrambled eggs for myself this morning and they were so good.
Man, I haven't had scrambled eggs in a long time. Those do sound good.
I think the seasonings are what really made them so good. I can give you my recipe.
That would be great. I am not the best cook you know.
No problem. Let me jot them down and you can give it a go.
Sounds good! I appreciate you offering me any help when it comes to cooking!
I took the dog for a long walk.
I bet he really liked that.
Yeah he did, but I need to get out more.
Trying to lose some weight?
Just trying to get some exercise and get in shape.
Having a dog as a companion is good.
Hey I just got back from the best walk with my dog!
That's awesome! I love walking my dog too
Yeah I was at work all day, so it feels good to go on a nice long walk
It's the best feeling when you get home and they're just so excited to go on a walk
Yeah we ended up going on a 45 minute walk
Wow I'm sure your dog loved that!
In a moment of weakness, I told someone a secret from another friend.
Was it me? I got skeletons in my closet.
No, but I feel bad about it. Whenever I drink, my mouth opens and I got a big mouth.
Who was it?
It was Lee.
Well then tell Lee not to tell anyone else. Be adamant about it. If he sprays it to anyone else, I got your back!
I love to gossip.
That's fine as long you are not talking about me.
I wasn't talking about you but I had something that I wanted to tell Lee.
Something confidential?
I leaned towards Lee with a secret that we were not supposed to tell.
So tell me already.
I cant believe their parents just let them play out in the road like that
one day those kids might get hurt if a car doesn't see them
hopefully nothing happens to them and they will stop playing on the road
I think they learned their lesson this time and wont do it again
I had the scariest moment today while driving.
Yeah the roads have been pretty terrible lately.
I saw some kids that were playing in the street on the right.
Oh no, please tell me you did not hit them.
I did not hit them, we were lucky because I swerved over to the right and avoided them.
Thank the lord! That was a rather close call, wasn't it?
Look at all of those children playing in the street.
Hurry. Move the car so you won't hit them.
They're on the left. I'll manoeuvre it to the right.
Do it now.
I just avoided them. That was a close call.
It definitely was a close call.
Hey, I have something for you that I’m only giving to you. No one else.
Oh I'm excited. What is it?
Here. It's a $100 Amazon gift card.
Oh, no way! Why are you giving me - and only me - this card?
Because you're the only one that didn't blab my secret to someone like they did. And I want to show you that i appreciate your friendship.
I would never! And i appreciate yours! Thanks, Jordan!
Just don't tell the others I gave you the answers to the test.
Why are you only giving it to me.
You're the only one I trust.
Thanks. I really appreciate it.
Just remember how I did something good for you around my birthday.
I don't even know when your birthday is.
I brought the car to the dealer today finally.
Does it need a tune up?
Something's wrong with it and the garage can't find it. I had to go back to the dealer.
Why didn't you go there first?
It always winds up being more expensive.
I hope they find out what's wrong.
i got in a little wreck and i was wondering if you could fix this
it's just a little scratch are you sure you want it fixed?
well, it's my mom's car and i think she will kill me
I guess that makes sense now
Can you fix my car?
We can fix it, but your warranty ran out last week.
Last week?  Are you kidding?
Three years or 36,000 miles.  Three years passed last week.
How much is it going to cost?
It won't be cheap.
We're having a surprise party for the sick children at the hospital
That's so nice of you to do. When is it?
Friday, all their friends and family are invited
How wonderful! Do you need me to bring anything to help setup?
I think we're good, though you can bring snacks if you'd like to
OK, see you at the party then!
Hey are you coming to the party?
Yes I am. I'm bringing TJ and Mike, too.
Great, as many as can come. The hospital is catering food and I want to uplift these kids as much as we can.
Cool, can't wait.
Thanks for coming everyone to this party for the sick children here in the hospital.
No problem, we are all glad we could come and support the cause.
I am lucky to have friends and family like you guys.
It is nice to come here and see the children playing.
I'm sure all of the sick kids are glad you all came.  It has definitely lifted their spirits.
I'm glad we could all help.
Lee asked me to teach him how to kiss, for when he tries to kiss you.
Did you show him how to French?
Yeah, he is going to try and kiss you at the party.
Should I wear the pink or green dress.
Go with the pink, it brings out smile.
I wanted to get a high score on the game so I took my shot.
How did you do?
Not bad.  I have good aim.  I am used to playing games.
Do you win prizes?
If there are prizes involved, yes.
You are a big time gamer then?
This game is so tough!
Have you hit the high score yet?
I am working on it. I took my shot and I hope I won't fail.
You are a great gamer. Don't give up.
You bet!
There is an issue going on with the certain parts of this persons mouth
Yeah her mouth seems a little defective, but I know a lot of puppets come with defects here and there overall they are fine
Yeah.  It is so interesting to see how they form over the years
Right you are absolutely correct
Yeah there really is a great thing to do overall,  I am going to move the doll's mouth up a little bit
I think that is a great idea
I think this puppet named Taylor I made isn't working quite right.
What's wrong with the puppet?
It has a defective mouth, I'll try to move the mouth.
You're a great puppet master, I think you'll solve this problem.
Ouch, the puppet just bit me.
I think you just moved the mouth too much, puppets don't move on their own.
So I was in line at McDonald's and someone in front of me paid for my food, so I paid for the person behind me.
That is awesome, if people were kind like that all the time the world would be a better place.
Yeah that's for sure, it was nice seeing the smile on the driver's face behind me.
It is always a nice feeling knowing you made someone's day.
It made the food taste even better in my opinion.
Yeah, and now you are making me hungry!
I spent several hours playing with the puppies at the shelter yesterday.
Did you find one to adopt?
I did, but it turns out Mom is allergic to dogs. She flared up at the dog hair on my clothes.
Oh no! Hey, maybe you should try those hairless dogs.
That's a good idea, I'll find some to play with and see if Mom has a reaction.
Always glad to help. Pets are good for your emotional health.
The first thing I'm going to do when I move out on my own, is get a puppy.
I love dogs. I have two of them.
I'd have one now but my mom has always been allergic to dogs and just about everything else.
That's too bad. I've been lucky because my parents both love animals.
Yes, you are lucky. I've never had a pet. But, I will, someday.
My mom won't let me buy your puppy.
Why not? She's such a sweet dog and she will stay small.
My mom is allergic to dogs so it's a big, fat no.
I really need to find her a good home. I'm disappointed.
I can talk to me Grandma and see if she wants her. At least I could visit her.
That's a great idea. Let me know what your grandma says.
I saw the most adorable puppy at the pet store today, he was so cute!
Why didn't you get him?
Oh believe me I wanted to take him home but my mom is allergic to dogs.
Was it an inside dog?
Of course, I want a snuggle puppy so bad!
Put it on the to do list for when you move to your own place
My date and I have so much in common.
That is a real positive.
We like the same restaurant. We like the same food.
That makes sharing easy.
My date wanted to order spaghetti, as did I.
I'll bet you serve spaghetti at your wedding.
Well I already know we have one thing in common.
What is that?
We both loved spaghetti. I admire a woman who will eat spaghetti in a restaurant.
That is funny. Most girls are too afraid of messing up their clothing. That is brave of her.
She is such a dainty eater too. Not a drop of sauce anywhere.
I can't believe that you noticed that.
I don't understand what the big deal is, we always go to these parties.
We do, but we've already been drinking, and no one can drive at this point.
I have only had a couple and its only about 6 miles, we got this.
No we don't got this, my mom was killed by a drunk driver.
I am so sorry Austin, I had no idea, we can stay home tonight.
Thank you, I just don't want to chance our lives.
Do you think I should go on that school trip?
No, I think you should stay with you family now, they are going thru hard times.
I guess you're right Austin.
You know I am, you must support them now.
I will, too bad I will miss the trip.
Don't worry you will have other school trips in the year.
Austin told me I should stick around for my sister's childbirth and not go on the trip to the mountains.  I thought that was a valid reason.
You can go up to the mountains any time.
My sister looks like she's about to pop any minute.  She would want my support.
Is this her first child?
Yes, the baby daddy took off a couple of weeks ago so she's all alone in this.
You be there for your sister.  She needs you.
Yesterday I had to take Robin to the emergency room.
What happened?
She dropped a glass, it broke, and she cut herself badly trying to clean it up.
Was there blood everywhere?
Yes, and you know about me and blood.
That must have been awful for both of you.
Robin was bleeding a lot today.
Is Robin hurt?
She dropped a glass that cut her really badly.
I hope she got medical attention.
She did, I took her to the emergency room.
She's lucky you could take her.
I was coming a bit late to the factory today and I was a bit stressed.
Did you made it late?
No, I made it exactly on time believe it or not!
How come?
I  turned the car to the left to avoid the traffic and used the empty streets around the highway, so I made it just in time!
Oh cool, I will try to drive that way tomorrow.
You know the usual route I take to get to my job at the factory?
Yeah, I've gone with you before.
Well you know how I usually take the right onto the highway at Johnson Street?
Yeah.
Well today I took the left onto Main Street to avoid the traffic on the highway.
I don't care about your mundane daily activities.
I'm so honoured to have served as council representative for the past year.
You did such a good job, you really served our class well.
I took the job seriously, unlike some of the other students who slacked off.
I think you should run for president next year.
That's my plan, but first I needed to gain experience by being a representative.
You would easily win the election and make a great president.
I liked being class president.
I liked being your vice president.
The school council, has a end of the year party planned for next week, did you recieve your invitation?
I got it yesterday.
I can't believe you threw this huge house party.
Hey man, I did not know you had a test tomorrow.
Now I am going to have to try to ignore all this noise and these people and sutdy this material.
I'm sorry man!
It really is not okay.
My roommate had a huge house party this weekend. I had so much homework to do, i just stayed locked in my room studying.
that had to be rough, with a party going on in the house.
It was. it was so noise the whole time. It made it really hard to concentrate.
were you able to get done what you needed to get done?
Thankfully, yes. After a while I was able to kind of tune it all out.
That's good. I'd hate for your schoolwork to suffer because of his party.
Can we just go home?
Robin, what happened? How did the audition go?
I just want to get out of here. I made a fool of myself. This was my big audition in front of some of the city's most prestigious dance judges and I fell on my face.
I'm sure it wasn't that bad.
No, I literally fell on my face. I came out, did a few moves, went into a twirl and slipped. I landed on my face. See, I think my tooth is chipped.
Robin, I'm sorry. And yeah, that tooth does look chipped. We should find you a dentist.
I'm doing the best that i can
You need to pick up the pace a bit
Maybe i wouldn't have to pick up the pace if you ever did a damn thing around here
Woah relax Tracy
I will not relax you are the most self cantered lazy person i have ever had to work with
Fine, ill leave you to it, just get it done
I cannot believe Quinn was so rude to me.
What happened? Did she know how sick you are?
Yes! She yelled at me to work faster.
That's not very nice. What did you do?
I lost my temper, I yelled and threw a book at her.
Maybe next time she will think twice before being so rude!
I know that this wasn't a good luck for me.
I didn't find anything wrong with what Quinn asked you.
That’s because there wasn't.
Sometimes people blow things out of proportion.
I think that it’s more often than not
How are you going to handle this moving forward?
The best way to recover from the flu is to be out on the beach and taking in the sunshine.
The sun and ocean has that effect on you as well?
Yes, I normally feel so much better when I'm in the element.
Whenever I don't feel good I try to make it to that location because it normally boost me.
I thought I was the only one.
A lot of people have the same reaction when it comes to the sun.
I am so happy I am over the flu and I can enjoy vacation. I was super groggy and shaky, but that's all gone.
I am very excited you are over the flu as well! I would hate to be sick on vacation.
Exactly, it's so beautiful on this beach. The water is pristine.
I agree, I love being able to lay on the sand and soak up the sun.
Would you have let me come with you if I was still sick?
Yes, I hear the sun and warm weather can do wonders to help with the flu. Make sure to keep hydrated.
I did not think I would make it to the beach because of the flu but luckily I felt better.
Did you feel bad at all when you were there?
Luckily the worst had passed and I was a bit tired but otherwise it was fun.
At least you got to go and didn't have to stay home.
Yeah that would have been a huge bummer.
I don't know if I would have felt like going if I were you.
My friend needed some cash!
Did you provide the cash to them?
Yes! I had to sell Carson's car.
were you able to sell it well?
Yes! I sold it at a high price
That's nice!
I'm selling your car for a high price.
Yeah no problem hope this works out.
the car is worth a lot of cash.
I'm going to make some serious cash.
Yea no problem on that.
Yea no worries.
I felt that I did the best I could when it came to getting them cash.
What did you sell?
I saw Carson’s car in order to get some cash.
Were you able to get a nice price?
I honestly got the best deal I think I could get.
That means I got the money they deserved and needed.
You wont believe what happened to me last night
what happened?  I never heard back from you!
I got lost and stranded! I somehow made it out alive
Where did you get lost?
I was in the rainforest alone all night
wow that must have been scary
I knew I shouldn't have gone hiking out there by myself, but nobody else wanted to go with me.
It was kind of a hot day to be out in the rainforest.
I know, it was miserable. And when my phone died, I got totally lost and stranded.
It must have been so scary being alone at night in there!
It was! I was surprised I made it out alive. I'll never do that again.
Or at least bring a friend or a paper map!
so you really think I can come to the group with Cameron
i know you feel like an outsider but I talked to Cameron and he said you belong in his group
i am so relieved I just cant tell you how happy i am
i am glad you're happy and I will see you when you get there
Even though I went off my depression medications I'm feeling a lot happier these days.
Wow, that's great. What inspired the change in heart?
I used to feel like such an outsider, but Kate and Lindsey assured me that I belong in Cameron's group, and that convinced me that I do fit in.
Of course you fit in! People love how quirky and unique you are.
I feel like those traits made me doubt myself.
Those traits are what make you so charming.
I missed yesterday's class and didn't know which was my group for the class project.
How did you figure it out?
It wasn't easy for me. I felt like outsider this morning in the class.
Did you talk to your teacher?
Not really. My friends assured me that I was in Cameron's group.
I'm glad it worked out for you.
Taylor got me hurt when we were play fighting
Are you alright? How bad is it?
I cut my arm a little bit on a sharp rock
Did you put a bandied on it?
Yes and disinfected first.
You both need to play more wisely
Taylor and I were play fighting in the back yard and he knocked me to the ground.  I cut my arm on a rock.
How bad was the cut?
I was bleeding pretty bad, but when I washed it off it wasn't really that deep.
Did you disinfect it?
Yeah, Taylor helped me clean it up, put on some ointment and a bandage.  He felt bad that he hurt me.
I'm glad it wasn't too bad of a cut.
Taylor threw me to the ground.
Oh sorry, how come?
We were playing in the backyard And during a play fight he tussled me to the ground.
Oh, that's why your arm's cut.
Yeah.
Sorry dear.
Hey want to go a few rounds with me, Taylor?
Sure, let's play wrestle for a bit.
Ouch, you just tossed me onto the concrete and I cut my arm!
Oh, I'm so sorry, I didn't realize we were being that rough.
I need to go inside and get a band-aid now.
Okay, we should be more careful where we are wrestling next time.
I love my cats so much that I bought them a petting brush and new food.
Where did you go to get the brush?
I went to Petco and they had several different kinds of brushes but this one is really soft.
Do your cats like it?
They run over to me whenever I bring the brush out so yes.
I will have to look into getting one because I have a cat myself.
My pets love being pet.
That is so fun can i try.
Here's a brush.
They love it as I see.
Yea that is so fun they are sweet.
Give them a treat.
Do you want to go to the pet store with me?
For what?
I really love petting my cats, so I want to buy them a brush.
Okay I will go with you to the pet store.
I also want to get them a large bag of food.
Okay, I will carry those items for you.
Hey can you help me pick out some flowers?
Who are you buying flowers for Remy?
This girl in my class I like.
Oh. You mean Jill don't you? I saw you staring at her.
Jill never responded. What a waste.
Don't give up hope Remy. I'm sure there's some way to get her attention.
It was so scary when I heard the tornado sirens go off in town.  I was with my friend, thankfully, and she knew what to do.
Did you guys find shelter?
We were outside in the field and she said we had to leave immediately to get to the basement immediately.
Did you guys make it on time?
We just dropped everything and started heading towards home as fast as we could.  We got in and locked the doors and went straight to the basement where we felt safer.
That's great that you got to your safe place.
That was pretty scary when the tornado sirens went off!
Luckily I was at home so I just went to the basement.
I was shopping in town so I went into the closest store as soon as I heard it.
I am just glad nobody was injured!
I didn't see any major damage anywhere.
I heard on the news that there was just some minor damage to trees.
Did you hear the sirens last night?
I think I slept through it. What happened.
The tornado sirens went off just as soon as I got into town.
Wow. Did you get to see it?
Yes. And I barely made it to the shelter that was nearby.
Whew. I cant believe I slept through that.
Did you hear the tornado sirens last night?
I sure did. I was watching TV when it happened.
I was driving down Main Street.
Really? Did you pull over?
Yeah. I took shelter at a local gas station.
We all need a little shelter from the storm these days.
I really hope to be a secretary.
Are there secretary jobs available?
I found two.  There is a lot of competition.
You will do great.
I hope so, I need this job.
I can give you pointers if you want.
I joined the chess club at school today.
Oh that's cool. I didn't know you played.
I play all the time in my free time so I've gotten pretty good.
It's an unusual game. You either love it or can't play it!
I guess that's true but I've been doing it all my life and find it really intriguing.
I'm glad you have a smart hobby like that.
I'm big on chess.
I can see that.
We should join the chess club.
There's a club dedicated to chests?
Chess! As in Checkers. Do you want to join the Chess club?
No, but I'll keep abreast of your progress.
I love that you like to read as much as I do.
We are just into different genres.
I love horror and mystery.
And I like biographies and satire.
We need to trade books. Maybe we can expand our horizons.
Our book collections are big enough. A lot of new reading material.
How many books do you have?
I only have a few. You?
I have a ton of books. I love to read.
Oh I love to read too, but I usually just go to the library.
I was thinking of donating my books to the library.
That's a great idea! But loan them to me first!
Do you want to read some old sci-fi?
Why Not? Hey how many books do you have Cameron?
Almost two hundred. Mostly old classics.
Wow! That's a lot my dad has almost that many.
Yeah, old books are my thing.
I want to look through all these old titles.
Wow, you have a lot of books.
Yeah, I love to read.
Me too!
You can borrow some books if you'd like.
Thanks!
I did not know Taylor was such a huge video game fan
Yeah, she is very much into that.
I was playing some games with her this weekend and try to get her distracted but it did not work
That is not surprising from everything that I've seen and heard.
If there's anything serious you need to talk to her about, make sure there's no video games on.
I know, I learned that the hard way.
I couldn't get Taylor to pay attention to anything else the whole day!
What had him so distracted?
We were playing a video game together and Taylor just got locked in.
Video games will do that to people. They're almost hypnotic.
I don't understand why Taylor would rather play video games than spend time with me.
Well, maybe you need to get her attention somehow.
That's exactly what I tried to do but she kept ignoring me and focusing on the video game.
Perhaps you should tell her how it bothers you.
I've tried in so many different ways but she seems disinterested in me.
Maybe she is addicted to video games.
You know that short cut we found a few weeks back between the high school and the movie theatre.
Yeah, the one with the fallen tree bridge over the stream.
Yeah, I showed it to Casey today after school.
Did she try and walk it in the heels she wore today?
No I warned her it was dangerous and to wear her gym shoes, even still she nearly slipped off the tree into the river.
Good thing she wore those sneakers that tree is so slick from the moss and water.
I was out on an adventure today.
An adventure huh? What did you get yourself into?
While out hiking with my friend, Casey, we walked through a grass plain and into a forest.
You saw a grass plain and a forest. Sounds like you saw quite a bit of natural scenery.
It was exciting but at the same time frightening. I had to warn my friend that the forest was dangerous.
They can be scary. Rattlesnakes, bears and poisonous insects call that habitat their home.
Hello Kendall nice to have you here, let me just finish this game and we will catch up.
That game looks amazing, how is it called?
Its called Guns and Boats and you can play it online with others.
The graphics look so cool, I will download it later and maybe we can play.
You should do that I would love to play this game with yo.
I will, I'm just intrigued by the game-play.
I hope Carson gets all this week's tasks done that I told him to do.
What does he have to do, Kendall?
I want him to inventory the stock room, and then he needs to get the payroll done for payments next Friday.
Do you think he can get it all accomplished in a few days?
Yeah, Carson is a dependable fellow. Works hard and has good work ethics.
Good, better than a lot of people I work with, most of them are lazy bums.
We need to keep safe from the evils of Satan
I didn't think any of this was real
Of course it is God is the answer
so that bible will keep me safe
As you can be
thanks I'm terrified right now
The bible is truly a weapon against the forces of evil.
Amen.
I'm going to leave it on the stand so that God can use it through whoever comes by.
Yes. Plus it's usually best to put things back in their place.
Excuse me, I just want to set this bible back on its stand.
Oh, ok. I didn't know you were particularly religious.
Yes, especially these days. I can use all the help I can get.
Well, whatever works for you is fine with me.
I sometimes feel like just having the book in the room helps keep evil away.
You really think so?
I have a crush on a girl in band class.
Is she the one who plays the tuba?
She is the one.
Have you made a move on her.
I wanted to impress her so I learned to play the trumpet.
That will impress her.
What did you think about my trumpet playing earlier?
You were really good. When did you learn to play the trumpet like that?
I'm trying to impress a girl in my band class.
Wanting to impress girls is the only reason guys ever get good at anything.
So what do you think?
You bought a trumpet because you think it will impress some girl?
Not just bought, mastered!
I think you're an idiot.
But she's in band class, band kids play instruments!
No one thinks band geeks are cool, not even band geeks, and besides everyone has to take band class at some point in the year so that doesn't even mean anything.
Am on my way to trumpet practice.
Since when did u start playing trumpet?
Not too long.
Why did you start learning to play the trumpet?
I am about to impress a girl in band class.
That's hilarious.
I think I'm getting better at playing the trumpet.
I didn't even know you were interested in it.
I'm learning how to play the trumpet to impress a girl in band class.
That's a lot of work just to impress a girl.
She's worth it since she's beautiful.
I guess. But can you learn the trumpet when I'm not around?
I am so glad I decided to go on that trip after all, the resort was amazing!
I bet it was, I have heard a lot of great things about that area
They are all true, what a beautiful place, I took a million pictures
Why don't you invite all of us to lunch for a picture viewing party, I can't wait to see them!
What a great idea! I can't wait to show everyone, the ocean, the animals, the food, it was all amazing!
Let me know if you need help organizing!
I can't wait to show you the album from my vacation!
I'm so jealous that you got to take a trip! I can't wait to see all the photographs.
I'm going to send them to everybody over text. I want everyone to check them out. I had so much fun.
I didn't have much fun at home while you were away, but I'll be happy to live variously through you!
It was just such a great trip, I'm so happy I got the opportunity to go.
Where did you all go?
I started in Paris, went to Munich, and wound up in Rome.
You really went to some great spots, let's get together so you can tell me about it!
Definitely! I took a lot of pictures and can't wait to show everyone. Let's get the group together for lunch.
That sounds perfect. I'll text everyone and get it set up.
Do you like watching me play this videogame?
I'd rather be playing it instead of just watching.
Let me shoot this enemy, then you can have a turn.
I'm trying to wait patiently, but I'm bored.
There...I blew the enemy away to kingdom come. You can play the next level.
Thanks! Finally, now you can watch the master shoot.
I just blew the enemy away to kingdom come.  It feels amazing.
Are you playing your video game again?
When am I not?  You know I am addicted.
Maybe you should take a break.  You want to go grab a frozen yogurt with me?
Today is kind of a perfect day for that.  It's so hot.  Sure.
Come pick me up.  I can be ready in five minutes.
I played really good that game!
Ha, I saw that.  What weapon did you use.
Funny enough, I just used the basic shotgun.
How did you manage such a game with just the shotgun.
I hide around corners and surprise people as they lurk on out!
You clever devil!  I may have to try that myself.
OH watch this!
Whoa! That was crazy. He was completely blown away.
Yeah, to kingdom come.
Gosh, this game is nuts.
I know! It's so fun and ridiculous.
I just want to keep playing all night!
Carol is always telling me to leave these video games to the kids.
They are a good way to relax, I like them too.
I just played one and blew the enemies away.
You go hard don't you?
Yes I do. Good way to relax and blow off the steam. I get competitive playing them.
I've never really been able to get into video games.
I'm going to give this teacher some candy so she thinks I'm nice
you might be able to trick her but all the kids know what you're up to
as long as the teacher thinks I'm nice then I don't really care
i guess we will see what will happen then
I am so upset my dog never came home last night.  I am afraid something horrible has happened to him.  I can't stop crying.
Did you go around the neighbourhood looking for him?
My mom and I drove around the whole neighbourhood calling out to him and we didn't find him.
Have you reported him lost to the police?
We haven't yet but will do that first thing in the morning.  I haven't given up looking for him yet.
This is quite upsetting.
We all have to organize and go out for a search tomorrow.
I know the neighbourhood would be willing to help too.
Everyone has already agreed to meet up in the morning and go out and look.
Make sure to bring signs to put on posts and stuff as well
That’s a great idea I'm going to print some out right now.
Where are we all supposed to meet up?
My neighbour is so sad!
I learnt their dog never came home last night.
Yes she is crying right now.
What could be done right now?
I think thy can find the dog if they do some work.
That's right!
My neighbour is literally crying, because their dog never came home last night.
Wow. Are you helping with the search?
Yeah. I think we can find the dog if we do some work.
That's great. Do you have a plan?
Yes. We've got flyers, and we are walking the neighbourhood. We've also got other neighbours involved as well.
Well, sounds like you're doing everything you can.
I am so sorry, I am just so scared and needed to grab something!
It is ok, you can hold my hand if you're scared.
Thanks, I don't want to seem like a baby.
No not at all, I think it's cute when people get scared.
Well I really just hate being jump scared more than anything else.
I feel the same way, it is just startling is all.
Feel better now?
Yeah, whatever, like you never felt scared before!
I mean, you knew we were going into a haunted house together, right?
I know, but it's still scary.
Hopefully, holding hands will make you feel better.
Thanks. I guess it does help a little.
I was so nervous when I was about to read the lists of the winners last night.
Why were you nervous? All you have do is read it.
What if I make a mistake? Remember that long announcement of the Miss universe before?
Yes what about it?
Kept flashing on my mind like a nightmare.
What is torture! But you need just fine though.
I held the envelope with the winner list.  I was feeling excited to announce the winner.
Winner of what?
It was a beauty pageant.
Who won?
My good friend, Alex, won.  She won homecoming queen too.
She must be beautiful and popular.
Liza you can stay with me. You should not deal with that Beast!!
I know but we have such a beautiful history. I still love the Beast.
The Beast is so ungrateful after you accepted him. He doesn't realized no one will ever accept him again.
The Beast did change after we got married. He's such a bastard and abusive. We don't even sing together anymore.
Whoa, you should really get an order of protection. The Beast will get violent. You don't need that in your life!!
Maybe if we work on a new love song then we will rekindle our love.
I don't think I'm getting through to Liza.
Is Liza in trouble again?
Yeah, she keeps getting into bad situations, I got her out of her last one.
And she's better now?
No, she got right back into the bad situation, she refuses to learn.
Some people just can't be helped.
I'm officially done with helping Liza.
I heard that she got in trouble again for doing the same thing.
I know, after everything that I did to try to help out.
Some people just aren't appreciative.
Isn't that the hard truth.
I'm glad you found out before you kept on being pulled along for no reason.
I know that you told me I should just break up with Jim, but I stayed with him and now he's drinking more than ever!
But Sasha, you know that the only way for him to get help is if he decides to quit drinking on his own.
I know, but he just seemed so helpless and he really needs me.
He's only going to continue treating you badly the longer you stay.
I know, I guess I'm just confused and I still love him.
Sasha, you really need to leave him. If I can't convince you, I guess you'll just have to learn for yourself one of these days.
She just thinks she is so perfect.
I know that she does, but she does have a great voice.
The only reason that she got that part is because he thinks she looks good and wants to sleep with her.
Are you jealous that she got the part.
Damn right I am, I worked harder than her.
I love you both, but she can sing better, don't get pissed.
It was fun making fun of Sydney when she was singing.
I actually don't think she's a bad singer.
She isn't. But I'm still going to make fun of her.
Why are you doing that?
I'm jealous of how beautiful she is. I guess that's why I'm doing it.
That doesn't sound like a good reason to do it.
I feel bad honestly.
Why?
Sydney is just so perfect, her clear skin, beautiful eyes,  and her personality, she reminds me of a Disney princess.
Yeah she's a dime piece alright, why do you feel bad?
She started singing, it was pretty bad, not horribly bad, but bad enough to notice, I took my time clowning her. I felt like finally there is something that isn't perfect about her!
Jealously is quite the thing...
At the ceremony when Remy's dad gave his speech, it was so great.  It brought tears to my eyes.
Really?  What was his speech about?
Mostly he talked about Remy and how he was so proud of her and how she was his inspiration for trying to be successful.
Wow.  It's too bad Remy wasn't there to hear it.
Yeah, I know.  But the prison wouldn't let her get a furlough to go to the ceremony.
It seems like they would work with her since she's the President's daughter and all.
His speech was amazing! It literally made me cry.
I know! I had the same thought, but I didn't quite cry
I wasn't expecting it to be that amazing
Me neither... I wonder what made him decide to do that
Maybe his recent life events? I know he's gone through some tough stuff lately
That makes sense.. Poor guy
I loved your dad's speech so much, Remy.
Yeah, he always has been great at public speaking.
I was literally in tears over it.
I am not surprised, I know a lot of people who could not stop crying.
I just want you to tell your dad, okay?
Sure, I will text him  that.
Hey, did you hear Remy's father's speech the other day?
Yeah, he gave a pretty powerful message. What did you think of it?
It was touching. At one point, I had tires in my eyes.
Don't you mean tears?
No, I mean tires.  You see, I used to work at a Discount Tire Factory, and his stories brought back memories from when I worked there.  I saw visions of rubber tires as he spoke.
Your humour brings tears to my eyes!  But I could use another set of tires for my van...
I should have never been issued a driver's license.
I'm afraid to drive with you.
I was parking my car and I never looked in the mirror.
I know where this is going.
My car rear ended another car.
No, Quinn, you rear ended another car.
Fido seemed thirsty so I filled up his water bowl - is that okay?
Yes, thank you. Can you add an ice cube as well?
Ice! The dog likes ice cubes?
He sure does. He'll drink the water then he will crunch the ice.
What a silly dog!
He likes vegetables, too!
you really do have a way with words that I can't explain
I guess it is because i took three years of psychology and I am really good with people
I have never put my emotions into words like this before
I guess I have a way of bringing out the best in people
I agree with that
I think we are connecting so well as friends.
Almost as if we are one.
That's it! You totally put into words what I have been thinking.
We should start a friendship pact.
We should totally start one to never end our friendship.
Let's shake on it.
Sasha has a special way with words.
Did she help you write that speech?
Yes, and I could never articulate those thoughts we shared.
Did you know Sasha studied English literature in university?
I thought her major was in computer science?
Yes, but her minor is in English literature, which she switched majors from.
Sasha has finally removed the foot out from my mouth!
OK. I'll bite.  How so?
You know how I am always tongue-tied around beautiful women?
Yes, Aren't we all?
Well, Sasha has solved the problem for me.  She expressed my thoughts as I have never been able to before, and has provided an excuse for any mistakes in speech I ever make.  Sasha has told spread the rumour that I have Tourette syndrome.   Now, it does not matter what mistakes I utter. It is not my fault!  And that is the truth!  My tongue has always warred against my brain.
Priceless!
I really need to cut down on my spending this month
did you finally pay off your debt?
No, but i think i can if i spend as little as possible and pay off what i can
just let me know if you need any help with it
i sure will
I really need to clamp down on my spending.
Yeah me too. I'm not saving any money for a rainy day.
Me either. And I have so much credit card debt. I really want to pay it off by the end of the year.
It's all those expensive shoes and bags you've been buying.
I know. So if I don't want to go out to lunch with you as much please don't take it personally.
Okay I won't. I'll do my best to keep you on track.
Guess who had the best costume tonight?
It was John, right? His vampire costume always wins!
Nope. It was Carson of all people! He dressed up as Wolverine and it was great!
Oh, that's cool! He went trick or treating?
Yeah, and I was handing out the candy for our family. I saw him and was shocked at the effort he had put into his costume, so I gave him an extra special treat!
Good for him! It's nice to see him branching out and being social, especially on a holiday.
Hey, Happy Halloween.
Happy Halloween!
Glad you could make it.
Thank you for inviting me.
Here's some candy.
Thanks, I feel like a kid again
Trick or Treat?
Treat!
Here you go, Happy Halloween!
Thank you very much.
You're welcome.
Happy Halloween!
Don't you love the end of October?
Yeah It's one of my favourite times of the year
Since today is Halloween, I want to give out some candy to the kids
Great, let's go by the door and see if anyone comes
I am sure my neighbour Carson will come, he is a nice kid
I'm sure he will love the candy we have for him.
Wow it's really storming out there!
Good thing this hotel is storm proofed.
Do you mind if I hang out here until the storm passes?
Yeah, that's probably a good idea. It looks pretty terrible out there.
Hopefully it'll pass before it gets too dark.
I think the weather channel said it would be over in a few hours.
That's about the worst storm I've ever experienced!
You're not kidding. The wind, the rain, the lightning! It's all bad.
Glad we got into Jesse's hotel otherwise we might have gotten hurt.
Me to. Not sure if we can stay here long as we're not checked in.
You worry to much. Who would kick us out in a storm like this?
Guess you're right.
Don't I feel good dude
You look happy, share the recipe Austin
My karate lessons finally paid up.
Tell me about it
Remember that guy who used to bully me. I stepped up to him and gave him a Tyson-like punch on his face. He went crushing into the bushes at school
Man! how did I miss that. Do it again haha!
I got back at that bully today. Those karate lessons paid off. I punched him right in the face when he started teasing me.
Did he hit you first?
Well , no but he is always  bothering me . He needed to be taught a lesson.
You should only hit someone if he  hits you first. But I'm glad you actually fought back for once instead of running away.
I saw the coolest invention on TV the other day.
I'm dying to know what it is.
It was an infomercial for reusable paper towels.
That's such a great idea, why didn't I think of it.
I use so many paper towels that I ordered a whole case of these new ones.
Let me know how well they work when you get them.
Hello, I need five cases please
what item are you calling about?
the reusable paper towels they seem so good
They are one of our best sellers, if you get order ten cases then you get five free
No way that's a great deal, ill do it
ok i just need some information from you
So I couldn't come over to your house yesterday because I was cleaning my fridge out all day.
Didn't your mom want you to do that like a month ago?
Yeah, I just never got around to it and was really lazy about it.
Was your mom happy you finally did it?
Yeah but I didn't get the gift card she promised me because I took so long to do it.
That sucks, but at least you finally got it done.
My mom has been bugging me to clean the fridge for months. I finally did it today!
Wow, was it a lot of work?
It was a great deal of work! What a mess.
But I bet you feel accomplished. I always feel good when I do something.
It does feel good that I finally did it. And now she won't bug me anymore. Plus it is nice to have a clean fridge.
Yes, and probably healthier, too. You don't know what can grow in there if you leave it!
It took me hours to clean out the fridge today but my mother wouldn't let me alone.
Is she happy with the result?
Yes but I should have listened right away; it had mold and ice too so took forever.
Well next time your mom tells you a cleaning needs to be done, I guess you'll have to move faster.
I am going to try to stay on top of it next time, that's for sure.
At least you have a super clean fridge to use now.
You would never guess what just happened
Why, what happened?
I was making some pizza rolls and ended up cooking them too long
Did you burn the kitchen down again?
No, but there's smoke everywhere. I'm going to open all the windows in the kitchen
Yea that'll help.
What a mess. I can't believe I forgot about my cookies. They're burnt to a crisp.
It really stinks in here. Yuck, this smells going to linger here forever.
You should of been here a few minutes ago. It was worse but I opened the window and it's getting better.
Good idea. Now throw out the cookies. They're keeping the nasty smell in here.
Does it still smell really bad?
No, it's definitely going away now...
Good. I opened the kitchen window so we're getting the cross breeze now.
Yeah I can barely smell it now.
Thank God. Well, I'm sorry I burned the pork chops.
That's okay. What should we do for dinner now though? I'm starved.
I was up all last night trying to Jordan sleep
Was he refusing to sleep?
Yeah, he kept whinging that he wasn't tired and wanted to stay up.
Did you have any success getting him to sleep in the end?
I did, I read him a book and that seemed to do the trick.
the oldest trick in the book that.
That kid of mine is driving me nuts.
Is this about his sleeping habits?
He won't go to sleep.
Last night or every night?
It was close to midnight last night and I had to read Jordan a story because he wouldn't go to sleep
You need to practice some tough love.
Jordan has been so difficult recently.
What do you mean?
He isn't sleeping at all.
Have you tried reading to him?
I have but it doesn't work.
Try reading him the Jungle book, that always worked for me.
Carson told me and my sister about the meeting for the new club at school.
What's the club?
It's a club for cyclists.  My sister and I are both cyclists so we are interested in riding with other people.
That's fun.  I've seen cyclist meet up at different places for rides.
There's a community of bikers.  These rides are fun.  Sometimes they can be competitive but they are mostly fun.
Hope you find new trails.
Hey guys we need to have a meeting about the new club.
I think that tonight would work.
What time should we meet?
Lets meet around 7 pm.
Should we met at the bar?
We can have a couple drinks and get this show on the road.
How are things going with Tracy?
Really well thanks, we met at a pub had a great time and ended up telling her to grab her keys
Wow! Things must be going really well.
Yeah I really like her, I hope she feels the same way.
I'm sure she does, you're a catch!
Wow, this is moving fast.
I told Tracy to get my keys. I really hit it off with her at the pub and was ready to continue talking in a quieter place.
Where did you guys go?
We were right by the ocean so I drove to the beach.
The beach is really nice this time of the year.
It's beautiful.  We sat and talked and drank the bottle of wine I had in my car.
You keep bottles of wine in your car?
I met a really cool girl yesterday
where did you meet her?
I met her at the Pub, her name is Tracy
nice! I'm glad you met someone cool for you
yeah I told her to get her keys so we could go hang out more after the pub
I hope you had a nice time!
I was late for work this morning.
What happened?
Got two flat tires on my way there.
Well that's not good, did you have any spares at least?
Only the one
Oh goodness! You poor thing!
I had two flat tires this morning and I only have one spare.  I was very late for work because I had to wait for the tow truck to come.
Is your car fixed?
It's still in the shop.  I'll pick it up after work.
How did you get to work?
The shop called a ride for me after I towed it there.
That's nice of them.
I really lost my temper yesterday with my brother.
That's what he told me. What happened?
He just kept making fun of me until I had enough and I ended up hitting him.
You hit your brother? Was it hard?
I'm afraid so. I hit him right in the face.
Jesse, you need to apologize to him.
My brother was making fun of me.
What happened?
I got really angry.
Did you fight?
Yeah I kicked off and hit him in the face.
Yikes!
I plan everything down to the last letter.
What are you working on?
I was making dinner for our parents so I went and got what I needed in the shop.
Everything smells really wonderful.
Do you want to stay for dinner?
I was waiting for an invitation.
Oh are you getting up to much this evening, Casey?
Yeah, I'm cooking my parents dinner tonight, I went to the shops earlier and got everything I needed.
Big shop was it?
Oh yeah! I bought so much food.
I made dinner for my parents tonight.
Very nice. What did you make?
Decided on a roast. Went to the shops yesterday and got everything required.
How did it turn out?
Very well if I do say so myself.
Quite the chef you are then!
I just got back from shopping for food items.
What are you cooking?
I am making my parents their favourite meal. I hope it turns out right.
I'm sure it will. You are a good cook.
I hope this recipe works. It's my first meal in the new apartment with them.
I really hope you guys enjoy it. Good luck!
Went and saw Death on Wheels four last night.
Oh nice who did you see that with?
I picked up Quinn and went both went to see it
Oh was it a date?
it might have been
Well did you get a second date out of it?
How was your time with Quinn and the movies last night?
It was really good thanks, I've picked her up and drove us there.
That sounds nice, was it a good film?
Yeah it was really good! Would definitely see it again.
I'll have to go and check it out for myself.
I strongly recommend that you do! I'll go with you to see it if you like?
I was so excited to go to the new pizza place at the mall.  I put on a new outfit.
Are you talking about the one by the toy store?
That's the one.  The line was so long.
Was it worth the wait?
I think so.  The pizzas had thin crust, like I like them, and they let you assemble your own.
I should try that out.
I think this new pizza is going to be really good
The hamburger pizza ls the best.
Have you been their already, Casey?
I have, I went the other day in my brand new dress.
new outfit to go with the new restaurant!
I had such a great time!
Yeah the pizza was amazing, had to dress up to adhere to their dress code.
Did you have a new outfit for the occasion?
I did, was so nice to be out wearing something nice.
I can't wait to finally go to court and get this stupid divorce over with.
How's Kai acting? Is he being cordial about the whole deal?
No, he's being stubborn and arrogant. But, I have something that'll give me an advantage at court.
What do you have?
I have proof of his affair. He doesn't know I know so he's going to be shocked.
I am so ready to be done with these divorce hearings.
Did you bring up the affair yet?
No, my lawyer recommended we save that until deliberations go further.
Oh, when is the next court date or what not?
I have to meet with lawyers this Friday.
I hope it goes well. It'll all be over soon.
I can't believe that my husband thinks I wouldn't know about his affair.
He's a fool. He is too wrapped up in his affair.
Well once we go to court for our divorce he will realize I knew all along.
You have to do what you have to do girl! He is the one that decided to step out on your marriage.
Do you think it is wrong that I don't tell him that I know?
Absolutely not! You don't owe him anything!
I didn't tell Kai that I know about his affair.  I want to have the advantage at divorce court.
Divorce can be so messy.
Things are good until they are not.  Now we're headed to divorce court.
What are you guys going to do with the house?
We've already put it up for sale.
It's the undoing of everything.
I had to use the bathroom really bad. Sorry we had to stop.
No problem. Do you want me to take over the driving. We are about halfway there.
Why don't we grab a bite here at the diner. I'm starved.
Sure, I could use a greasy burger and some fries.
You can take over the driving once we've eaten and relaxed for an hour.
Sounds like a plan. It'll wake us up. We'll be there in no time.
Thanks for stopping. I really needed that bathroom break.
No problem, we're making pretty good time so I'm in no rush.
Good. How much longer do you think it will take to get there?
A couple more hours probably. It should be a nice drive.
Yeah, I've been enjoying the scenery so far. It's nice.
We're lucky. This part of the country is quite beautiful this time of year.
I was walking on the rocks and bent down to pick up one and the spider bit me on the arm.
Did you see what kind it was?
No, I picked up a stone and killed it before I could see.
You should have left it alive, in case you have a reaction to the venom.
We're almost there, only a few more minutes on the road.
You're doing a good job driving today, especially in these rainy conditions.
I'm trying to be safe and go slow, there could be objects on the road from the storm.
I don't mind going slow, as long as we get there safe and in one piece.
That's my number one focus, I want to ensure our safety.
Thank you for being such a responsible and good driver.
How was the drive up?
It was ok, took our time considering the conditions were bad and I was on the look out for anything in the road that shouldn’t be there. 
Good on you! Better to arrive later and in one piece than try rushing here and risking an accident.
Exactly!
You hear of some many terrible driving accidents on the news these days.
I know, I had no intention of letting that happen to us.
Wow that storm did a lot of damage last night! There's so much debris on this road.
I know right? I would have been freaked out if I was the one driving.
It was scary, going slow and steady was definitely a good idea.
Agreed, glad we took our time and were cautious as we travelled.
you know it, all I cared about was getting us here safe and sound
Hopefully the drive back will be a lot easier for us!
I thought this work was really hard but you didn't have to steal my homework
I took your work away because you were copying everything from me!
you cant really prove it though
Yes I can, you literally copied my work word for word, I'm going to show this to the teacher.
No please don't! I promise not to copy from you anymore.
I just don't understand why Skylar is so bitter. I've decided to try to walk a mile in their shoes.
I don't think that expression is meant to be taken literally.
Well, It can't hurt, can it? Hm. Actually these shoes are really tight. It really does hurt. No wonder Skylar is so bitter about life.
Did you fall on your head as a child or were you just born that way?
I kinda get why Skylar is so bitter all the time.
Oh yeah, and why's that?
I was chatting with her and she told me how tough she has it, she has so many things on her plate and she's having to deal with it all on her own.
Bless her that sounds rough, it can't be easy on her at all.
It really isn't, I offered to help out.
Thart's really kind of you.
I went to visit Riley after not seeing him for a long time.
Is everything ok why did you decide to go see Riley?
We had a long conversation on the phone and we still miss each other even after dating other people.
Do you think the two of you will get back together after separating after such a long time.
I believe only time will tell but I felt the same spark from the past.
I would say take it slow and try not to repeat the mistakes of the past.
Guess what dear?
Talk to me
I got an invite to Riley's home this morning
The Riley we know? We haven't seen her in ages, is she around?
She came back from Austria last week after a 10 years hiatus
Wow, you should ask her to invite me too
I visited Riley at his home today.
How was that?
It was good.  Not uncomfortable at all.  I remember the good times spent together even though we have been separated for years.
Those are your shared memories. No one can take them away.
That's true. It was nice to see that Riley is healthy and doing well.
We want our friends to be well.
I hadn't seen Riley in a long time.
How long had it been?
It has been 7 or 8 years 
How was it seeing her?
It was actually really lovely to reconnect, I've missed her ever so dearly.
Aww that's so nice.
I need to eat more often at home and my bank account agrees.
You are such a great cook I can't believe you like eating out so much.
I am a good cook but don't like to do it that much. My bank account shows that I eat out too much.
Well I guess saving money is as good a reason as any to eat in.
Yes it is. I can cook dinner and always have leftovers for lunch.
Great idea and awesome way to eat healthier and save.
I was planning to go out to dinner tonight but then I realized I didn't have cash.
Were you going with someone?
No but I just couldn't make up my mind if I wanted to go out and then I checked my bank.
No money definitely helps that decision.
Yes, I'm staying in and cooking what's in the pantry.
Put on a good movie while you're cooking and I bet you'll still have a good time.
really wanted to eat out tonight, but looks like that won't be happening now.
Why not?
I checked my bank account, and I really can't afford to.
Are you gonna cook something for yourself then?
I am indeed, although I'm not sure what I have to cook
I'm sure you'll whip up something nice and tasty!
Do we have any chocolate mint ice cream back here?
I don't know Remy. Check the freezer in the corner.
I don't see any. Darn.
Who wants it?
Just a guest. They were really bummed that we were out of it, so I told him I would check the back to make sure.
I'll tell the manager to buy more tomorrow.
We had unexpected company last night.
I heard about your gathering.
One guest wanted a treat.
Were you in charge of refreshments?
I went to the back to see if there was any ice cream for our guest.
I hope there was some left in the freezer.
I love pets and wished we could have some.
Why don't you head to the pet store?
We can not afford to buy one.
Maybe later then.
My neighbour's pets are always in our garden so how I want them for myself.
You'll find one.
I really wish we could have a dog in this apartment.
It's too bad our landlord doesn't allow pets.
Yeah, the neighbours in the house across the street always look so happy when they play with their dog.
I guess next time you move you should find somewhere that allows pets.
I'm definitely going to.
I can't wait to move into a house.
I wish I could have some pets.
Yes, they can be fun.
My neighbour's have a dog and a cat.
Do you like them?
I love them--they're beautiful and playful.  I wish they were mine.
You should try to get a pet of your own.
I can't wait to get a dog of my own
What makes you so excited to get a dog?
my neighbours have one and it's the most adorable thing in the world!
Aww that's sweet, would you not rather a cat as a pet instead?
Heck no! I want a dog.
I'm sure you'll get one eventually
How was the trial yesterday?
Tiring, I brought up the accusation that my neighbour blamed me for the damages
How did that go?
I think it went fine but I'll find out more tomorrow.
I can't believe this guy what a Jerk.
What happened Robin?
Bill caught his wife cheating on him with me and blamed me when she jumped out of bed and broke his property. Now he's taking me to court.
Jeez Robin! what did she break? What is he suing you for?
Some antiques near his bed and some family heirlooms and statues. He says the damage was my fault. If you ask me he's just a jilted lover trying to get revenge.
She was having an affair with you in her husband's house? Awkward.
This is not a frivolous lawsuit like some may think.
What is the basis of your suit?
My neighbour accused me of damage to their property.
How can they say you did that when we've been having such bad storms?
Exactly. I don't know but I am not paying for it.
It sounds like they are defaming your character with their accusations.
So I finally hired someone after interviewing all day!
Great, are you happy with the decision?
Well she was the best candidate for the job, she has a ton of accounting experience so I am hopeful
Sounds good, I'm glad you found someone, I know interviewing can be so time consuming
Yes, I don't like it very much but you have to pick through to get to the best
Good luck, I hope your new employee works out
I've been holding job interviews all week for an accountant.
Did you find who you needed?
I think so, I offered one of the candidates a job She was easily the best compared to the others.
Hopefully they except and start working for you.
I hope so too so we can have a real accountant on board.
If they don't just let me know and I'll try to find someone for you.
Lately I have been overwhelmed with the amount of work coming into the company.
Oh man!  Do you think you'll be able to hire someone?
Yes.  I don't like the bookkeeping aspect so I posted a position for an accountant.
How'd that go?
I held the job interviews today and offered the job to an amazing candidate.
Wow!  Hope the candidate can help you out.
I finally finished the interviews for a new accountant.
Did you find a good candidate?
I think so. Several of them were quite good.
How did you choose?
Well, one seemed to have a little more relevant experience, so we offered them the job and they accepted.
That's great news!
It ended up being a fantastic night, but the highlight was dinner.
Where did you end up going to dinner that was so great?
Tri-Town Burgers, have you ever heard of it?
I have, but how did you get reservations there? I heard they were booked for months!
I guess it pays to know someone doesn't it?!
You are so lucky, I am jealous!
I think I might've eaten the best hamburger ever last night.
Weren't you out on a date?
Yes I was, and we went to a restaurant that served these unbelievable hamburgers.
Oh nice, what was so special about their burgers?
Just a variety of burgers as well as the different meats they used to make these burgers.
That sounds like fun, I'm going to check it out.
I was so worried we wouldn’t be able to find Skylar.
Was it that busy?
It was rammed! I tried calling out to her, ringing her phone but I couldn't get through to her no matter what I did.
How did you find her in the end? 
Thankfully she found me, she saw me from across the crowd.
I had to work extra hard to keep Skyler's head down.
What was so important about keeping our head down?
If she happen to look directly at the guard then we would be eaten.
That sounds gross.
It's not for the faint of heart
How many of these people are there?
I kept Skylar's head down as we past by the guards because we don't want to be beaten.
Where were you guys?
We were at a protest in Portland, Oregon over the weekend.
Did the guards show up again?
There were so many later on in the night, things really got out of hand.
I saw that on tv.
I killed Kendall.
What happened?
We were arguing and I pulled a knife.
Did you stab him?
He died instantly when I stabbed him.
I need you to come to my house right now!
What is going on? Are you ok?
Kendall and I started fighting about the baby and I pulled out a knife to scare him.
You didn't hurt him did you?
He is dead, I didn't mean to kill him!
I have a place that we can hide the body. I am on my way.
I have done a terrible thing. I have killed Kendall.
What kind of sick joke is that?
This is not a joke. We were arguing and I just found myself pulling a knife and stabbing her.
You know I have to call the police.
I will understand if you do. I am shaking too much to talk to them
Where are you at the moment?
I'm really messed up this time.
What do you mean?
I'm freaking out! I feel sick!
Please, you're scaring me, what happened?
I've killed Kendall!
please tell me it isn't true!
Things were getting out of control at work.
What was happening in your office?
Employees were calling in sick and others were goofing off.
What did you do?
I didn't get mad or anything like that but I did do a write up on each and every one of them and put these reports in each of their files.
Better to answer a protest against your reports than a protest against your temper.
The situation is starting to be very frustrating
What are you talking about?
I've been trying to contact someone on the phone for over an hour about my account and I'm still on hold
Do you feel like giving up and trying later?
I'm so mad I feel like breaking the phone, but I know I have to keep my cool if I want to get this problem taken care of
I agree, you must keep cool to get things done
I really had to hold back my temper with Tom and Jeff the other day.
What did they do now?
Well, they started picking on the kids at the other table at lunch the other day.
They really have to stop being bullies.
Honestly, I don't know why I sit with them. This time, things were really getting out of control. One of the kids looked like he was going to cry.
Oh my God. You really need to set them straight. It's ok to joke around, but not ok to bully.
My car was making a terrible noise from the wheels so I asked my friend Remy to take a look at it.
What was the problem?  Was it  your brakes?
No, my wheel bearings had gone out.  Remy changed the old bearings and had to put in all new ones to replace them.
That's a pretty big job, isn't it?  Remy must be a good mechanic.
He's a great mechanic.  We are talking about going into business where he will be the mechanic and I will manage the business.
I think that's a great idea, you guys will make a fortune.
So I wasn't able to salvage the old bearing but if we get new bearing we should be able to fix it.
Ok thank you so much for you help. I wanted to save as much money as possible.
I know how it is some times I try to save money as well I know how much cars cost to fix.
Yea its always an unexpected expense so its never fun to deal with
Hey you got to let Bailey come with me to tonight's game
I need him home, I have to work and no one will can watch Charlie
I can get Claire too, its the finals please!
Claire would do that?
of course, if you don't mind her bringing our brood over too
Well I don't have a problem with that then
I went to the beach yesterday.
Well, that must have been fun.
Are you kidding.  I hate the beach and with my family no less.
You don't like the beach?
What's to like--the sunburn, the sand in your clothes, the hours of boredom.
I love the beach; I guess everyone's different.
What a miserable day I had. Never again, I promise you that.
You didn't have fun? How can you not have fun at the beach?
It's not my idea of a good time. It's too hot, too crowded and the sand hurts!
I guess you prefer an in-ground pool, right? That's probably more your speed.
Or just an air conditioned room. That's good enough for me.
Well, some people just aren't into the whole nature thing. I get it.
I just made an old woman cry.
How did you manage to do that?
Well, she was saying things about how I dressed so I went off on her.
You could have just ignored her.
She was annoying.
That doesn't mean that it was okay to make her cry.
I stopped at the bar to spend an hour shooting dart before heading home.
Good, are you still playing in the big tournament next weekend?
Yeah I am, I'm pretty exited.
How do you think you'll do?
I feel really good, like I could even win!
That's great, good luck!
Sorry I'm late. I stopped at Bud's Tavern and started playing darts. I forgot the time.
No problem. I just got here so it hasn't been long.
Still, I invited you over and wasn't here when you got here. That's pretty bad.
Forget it. Let's get the TV on, the game's starting soon and we have nothing to eat or drink.
Alright...let's go. I have a bunch of stuff to choose from. Let's go hit the kitchen.
I brought a few things. They're in the car...I'll go get them.
I ended up going to that Tavern that you told me about last night.
What did you think of the pool tables?
I didn't ended up playing pool, I played darts for like an hour.
The darts area is nice as well. I really enjoy it there.
Would you like to go tomorrow night.
Yeah, I will meet you there at 10pm, it is a great way to let off steam after work.
Bob's all boxed and pack up everything in his apartment now.
Did he have a lot f stuff to pack?
Yeah he dd! I had to gather mine and Bob's friends to help move everything across town
Were they helpful?
Yeah they really were, super helpful.
Well that's good to hear!
I gathered some friends together to help Bob move last weekend.
Where did Bob move?
He moved across town. We had to box up everything in his apartment.
How long did it take to move?
We spent the entire Saturday moving.
You got everything boxed up
Just a few small things but it shouldn't take long
Want me to start taking what you have here in the living room
Yeah that be good, i guess the other guys can take what's in the dining room
ill let them know
hey, I really appreciate this
They really appreciated my food.
You are a great cook Skylar
After they had eaten all the food they all came to a unanimous agreement that I am a great cook.
There's no lie in that.
It really made my day when they all said that.
That's nice.
I am so glad that all the guests enjoyed my food.
What did you make?
I offered them some roast beef and they all agreed that my cooking was superb.
I loved your food the last time you hosted me too
How did you food go down at the party earlier? Did everyone like your cooking?
Yes they did! It was a roaring success I'm happy to say.
Wow that's excellent!
They all came to the unanimous decision that I am in fact a great cook haha.
Haha I know you are!
Maybe I should look into finding a job as a chef in a high end restaurant.
I was busy cooking for the party all night.
I loved all the food you prepared at the party.
I am glad you did.
When everyone had eaten, they uttered how great a cook you are.
That is sweet of them.
Everyone had a really fun time.
How was the camping trip last week?
It was good but I think my friends got annoyed at me.
How come?
When the fire was going out I poured more fuel on it and nearly set myself on fire doing so.
Oh you need to be more careful, I'm sure they were not annoyed at you and just concerned for you.
Yeah maybe you're right.
Hey, don't let the fire go out guys.
The winds blowing too hard. There's no way we can keep it lit.
Do you guys have any dead wood?
Nope.
No matter. I have some lighter fluid in the car. I'll just pour that on the fire.
Great idea. Thanks for keeping us warm Riley.
The fire was going out at our camp site so I pour some fuel onto it to keep it going.
When did you go camping?
I went last summer with my friends.
Were did you guys go?
We drove up north to Yosemite. It was so nice.
That place is majestic.
I tried to help, but it didn't work.
Casey thinks we're all a bunch of lazy dorks.
Maybe we just need to work harder.
I can't work any harder.
I'm really exhausted from staying late at the office last night.
Did you finish working on that presentation?
Yeah, I submitted it to my manager Casey this morning.
Hopefully she's impressed with your efforts.
I know. The reason I stayed late is because I want to change her impression that the team isn't working hard enough.
Well, I'm sure she will recognize that you're trying to go above and beyond.
Casey was telling me that she was having a lot of trouble with one of her teams being productive the other day.
I wonder what she is going to do about that. That has to be stressful!
I actually came up with a plan for her to try to improve their productivity.
Well hopefully it works for her.
I know I told her if it isn't working to let me know and I will try to tweak it for her.
That's really generous of you to devote your time to helping her.
I don't think I can keep secret.
Why is that?
I just had to spill the beans when Mike asked about the information.
Aren't you betraying someone's trust?
You can say that. I was even warned severally on keeping the information private
Let's hope Mike can keep a secret.
I think I may have really messed up.
What have you done Ash?
It's such a big secret but I had to tell someone! So I told Mike
What was it you told him exactly? 
I told him about his partners affair.
Why would you do that? It's not your place to say!
Kai really upset me you know.
He brought up my weight when he caught me cheating on my diet by eating some cookies.
I'm sure he didn't mean to offend you, he's worried about you I'm sure.
Yeah maybe you're right, I haven't been very good at keeping up with this diet.
I got busted eating cookies today. I'm supposed to be on a diet.
Who busted you?
Kai and then she told everyone to watch me.
That's funny but she's doing it for your own good.
I know but this is really hard being on a diet.
What time did you get in last night Remy?
Super late to be honest with you, did you not hear me come in?
no not at all.
Oh thank god, I was trying to be as quiet as possible so as not to wake you.
you were very quiet then! I'm a very light sleeper.
Oh I know, I'm glad I did disturb your sleep.
I got home really late.
How late were you?
I was really late.
Did your parents hear you come in?
No I don't think so. I was trying to keep from making noise so I kept quiet.
I guess it worked.
I had to be really quiet last night. It was pretty hard.
Why were you being so quiet?
My sister was over with her new-born who cries all the time. It was asleep so nobody made any noise.
That's a good reason to be quiet.
I hate to say it but I was glad when they left.
Aubrey isn't talking to me now.
Oh man, what happened?
Well, we got into a fight yesterday because I abused her trust. Now she is giving me the cold shoulder with silent treatment.
Damn, that sounds messy.
Trust me, I know.
It's ok, I'm sure you'll work it out soon.
Aubrey hasn't spoken to me all day.
You getting the slight treatment then?
So it would seem.
What did you do?
I lied to her and betrayed her trust, I hope she stops with the silent treatment soon so we can talk things over.
I took the car to our usual mechanic but I think the owner was out, it was some young guy instead.
Did they find out what was wrong?
He said something about the alternator, but honestly I didn't trust him. That wouldn't make any sense.
Are you going to get a second opinion?
Probably, but I don't know where. I want to avoid large chains but I don't know any other good shops.
Try Auto Partners on Fillmore, they've always been great with me.
I was at the auto shop today?.
Oh no, did your car break down?
No I just noticed an oil leak when I was leaving for work this morning. I was leaving early so I had time.
Oh that's great you were able to get right in.
Yeah I called them from the road so they were ready for me. They didn't think it's anything serious, and got it patched up pretty quickly.
Well that's good to hear.
Something went wrong with my car.
What happened?
Well, I walked to my car this morning and there was this pool of oil around it.
Well that can't be good!
Certainly not! Hopefully the fix doesn't cost me too much.
Fingers crossed for you.
My leg hurts ever since I fell on my trip.
did you get your leg checked out.
Not yet, I don't think it was that serious of a fall.
you never know though because my dad broke his leg last week when he fell on his bike.
maybe I should get it checked out, I do have quite a nasty bump on my leg now.
Today I went to a restaurant near work for lunch. It didn't go very well at first, but turned out okay in the end.
Was it the food or service or both?
The menu had lots of yummy choices on it, but none of them were very healthy.
I'm so proud of you for trying to eat healthier foods. What did you order?
I ordered a salad, it was the only healthy item on the menu, but it was delicious!
Well, at least you know now where you can get a healthy lunch that's close to work!
Did you go out for lunch today? 
I did, wanted to treat myself to a nice healthy lunch.
oh lovely! What did you get?
Just a salad but it was so yummy.
That sounds good, let me know next time you go out for lunch.
I will do of course.
Its so hard to eat healthy around here
It really is. I'm glad you finally got it under control a little bit
Me too! I used to eat like a pig.
What have you eaten today?
Just a salad so far.
Good on you for going with the healthy option!
Busy day today?
Yeah a bit, I helped Aubrey pack her car ready for college.
Nice! Did it take you guys long to pack?
Not long at all actually with the two of us doing it.
Aww that's good, are you sad to see her go off to college.
Yeah I am to be honest, I'm going to miss her so much.
I helped Aubrey pack up her car yesterday.
Really? Where is she going?
She's going off to college on the other side of the country.
Won't that be hard on you guys? You've been best friends for awhile, right?
We've been best friends our entire lives.
That's crazy! I hope you keep in touch while she's gone.
It was so fun pretending I was one of the dogs.
What did you guys do?
The dogs had started to chase a hare, so I joined them.
How did it go?
The dogs caught the hare and the baby sitter caught me.
I bet she wasn't thrilled about having to clean you.
I really want to get a dog.
Why don't you get one?
I don't know if I can handle one.
Just get a small dog.
It's not just size--it's the responsibility.
There is that; you have to devote time to them.
I have wanted a dog for so long and I think I finally found the right one.
Why don't you go ahead and get it then?
I am just worried because it's a German Shepherd and I am worried that I won't be able to control it.
I took my dog to an obedience school and I can give you the number if you want it.
I know it's important for the dog to know I am in charge so that's probably a good idea.
I think you should call and talk to my trainer because I think you will be fine with your new dog.
I really want a dog but I'm not sure if I can train it or not.
Yes you will it will just take time and patience.
You think so? I'm just a bit nervous about controlling and taking care of an animal.
You will be fine and once its done and you will love your dog
I decided against getting a dog.
Why? You really wanted to get that beagle. What happened?
Well, I did want that cute beagle, but I don't feel I would have been good enough at controlling it.
It takes time and patience to train a dog to do the things you want, it just doesn't happen overnight.
Well, I think you're right, but I don't know. Perhaps a different kind of dog?
It's possible. Just don't make rash decisions. Think about it.
I have a terrible habit of making many assumptions about people I meet.
I find that rather rude.
I know it is. It is getting in the way of my relationships with people.
Needless to say, people who make assumptions about others are not well liked.
How can I change this?
Try to hold an honest conversation with someone to learn more about them.
I really wish I had more friends here at school. I get lonely sometimes.
I think you just need to be a little more open minded about people. You sometimes come across as uppity and rude.
I know. I get that from my mom. She always assumes people are dishonest and out to take advantage of her.
Well now that you know that you can work on not being like her. I know you're a nice person. You just need to show that side of yourself to others.
I will definitely work on that. There's a book club in my dorm. Maybe I'll join and focus on being open minded and friendly.
That's a great idea Quinn! I'll bet you have more friends than you can handle in no time.
I realized a lot of people dislike me.
What drew you to that conclusion?
I make a lot of assumptions about people. I do. Someone called me out on it and said it was rude.
Was it just one person, though?
Telling me explicitly, yes. But I did ask around to confirm.
Well, I think people should have nipped whatever's annoying them in the bud instead of stewing.
I beat Aubrey at arm wrestling the other day.
Isn't he older than you?
Yeah, he's stronger, too.
That must have felt great.
It made me feel powerful.
Way to go! That's a terrific achievement.
I think Aubrey wants to fight me now. I beat him in arm wrestling and he's really mad.
He's a poor sport! I'm not really surprised since he goes around bullying people.
He bugged me for an hour to arm wrestle him. He kept say he was old and stronger than me.
Why did you finally do it?
Because I wanted him to go away. I figured he would just beat me and leave...but, I beat him.
I spent most of the day asleep today.
Why were you so tired?
I went to the game last night at the stadium and wound up getting back in after 3 am.
Oh, that's really late.
And it takes a lot of energy out of you. So I didn't get up till after lunch today.
I hope you're refreshed now.
I can't believe how much I slept today.
You must have been really tired.
I came home late last night from the game.
It must have been good.
It was a good poker game. Made lots of money.
So any chance you treat me out to dinner?
The game was so fun last night.
Yeah, that comeback was insane, did you go the party afterward?
Yeah, I spent too much time there.
Did you get home late?
I did, I spend the next day fast asleep.
At least you're well rested now.
Wow, I slept the entire day away today.
You must've gotten in pretty late last night.
I did, yeah. The game went long so it was much later than usual.
Good thing you had the day off.
Yeah, but I spent it in bed. What a waste.
It's better than missing a day of work, in my opinion.
I literally slept the entire day today.
Why did you waste an entire work day?
I was out at the game last night.
That's not really an excuse though to sleep in.
Well I got home at like 2 am and there was no way to get any sleep.
I am surprised that you did not get fired to be honest.
I went to school for three years.
Why three years, did you drop out?
No I was kicked out.
What did you do?
I was just a brat that didn't care for education, I really regret my actions now though.
I was wondering why I could hardly understand what Sydney was saying.
I noticed but she was babbling words to herself.
Tomorrow I can talk to her and I demand an explanation.
How irresponsible of her.
I have never seen her this way.
She may have a serious problem.
I think I nailed the homework.
What makes you say that?
I was unsure initially, but then I had Jesse look it over and she said it looked great!
That's good! Jesse is the smartest in class.
You're not wrong there.
Lucky you're such good friends with one of the smartest people at our school.
Since I need all the points I can get for class I had Jesse look over my homework.
Jess is very smart so she's a great person to have.
You're right about that.
Maybe I should ask her to look over some of my stuff?
You should as it will be guaranteed that you get a good grade.
I'll send her a text and ask her.
I gave Jesse the homework we did to check it because he is the smartest in the class.
That is a good idea, Jesse really knows his math.
I really hope so, this is the last assignment of the year before the big final exam.
He has like a 97% in the class and gets A's on every test, we will be fine.
I am just worried because I am sitting on a C and close to a D.
Jesse will correct all the mistakes we made on it, don't worry about it.
I must've really upset Lee.
What did you do to the poor boy now?
I was only playing around and teasing him a little but he burst into tears and is really upset at me now.
Well what did you expect? What did you say to him?
I may have tod him he smells weird and looks funny.
Well that's not very nice at all now is it? You should apologise he's a nice boy.
I was teasing Lee earlier today.
That's not very nice of you!
No, it wasn't. I stopped when he got upset.
Why did you do it?
I was just playing around I didn’t want to upset him, but he started crying and that made me feel awful.
Maybe that'll teach you to never tease him again!
Lee started crying over a little teasing yesterday. She's so sensitive.
Why were you teasing her?
She was stumbling over her words. It was just a joke and all in good fun.
It doesn't sound like she thought so. You need to be more considerate of her feelings.
I don't get why it bothered her, but I'll try to hold my tongue next time.
That's a good idea. She's not going to remain friends with you if you are always picking on her.
Oh man, I felt so bad.
What happened?
I was teasing Lee about his break up and he started to cry.
Wow, you must've really upset him.
I did. I didn't really think he cared about the girl. I stopped teasing him as soon as I realized he was in pain.
I'm sure he'll understand. You two are always teasing each other.
How was the drive up?
Not too bad although we had a slow start.
Why was that?
I left my keys behind and had to drive back to get them.
Haha what are you like?
I know I always forget something don't I.
Hey, can you pick me up soon?
Don't you have a car? Why can't you drive yourself home?
I accidentally left my keys on the kitchen table.
Ugh, you're so forgetful!
Oh no! I forgot my keys on the kitchen table.
So what are we going to do?
We either have to walk home or someone will have to go back and get the keys?
You better start walking back and get those car keys.
Walk with me, please.
I can't believe that I left my keys on the kitchen table.
Haha, it was so funny to see you try to start your car without the keys.
I can't believe that I did that.
Its ok it happens to the best of us, just try to remember next time.
Just to let you know I used the last of the sugar.
Oh how come I thought we had loads left?
We did it I used a lot to pour onto the only disgusting cereal we had left in the house.
Why would you do that the cereal is not that bad!
It really is though! I cannot stand it.
Well next time you're out remember to pick up some more sugar then.
I hate corn flakes.
I didn't even know people still bought that.
I found some in the cabinet, so people still buy it.
It seems like a collectors item even though it's all over the place.
I had to pour so much sugar in the milk to make this even edible.
I can imagine, I'm sticking to my cinnamon toast crunch.
Did you want to finish the cereal with me?
No thanks, I am not a huge fan of cheerio's, they taste to bland.
That's okay, I don't really like them either, but I have a secret to eating them.
What is the secret?
You have to pour a ton of sugar on the cereal and than it taste great!
Maybe true, but to much sugar is really bad for you!
Have you eaten yet?
Yeah I had the last of the awful cereal we had left in the cupboard.
The Bran-flakes? I hate that stuff to, how do you eat it?
Honestly, I pour a lot of sugar on them.
Ah that explains where all the sugar has gone then.
Haha, yeah sorry about that.
I love this jam! Turn it up!!
I love that jam too but you have too much static.
I will turn it some more so we can hear it.
Carson, the static is annoying me.
Okay if I turn it up some more it will drown out the static.
Carson, my ears are bleeding!! Stop it!!
Pretty sure I made my friend half-deaf.
What do you mean?
We were listening to music and I turned the volume right up.
Was it loud?
Oh yeah! Really loud.
You should be careful or else your ears will start ringing.
Guess what they were playing on the radio today. The Beatles...stuff I haven't heard for a long time.
I love them...I listen to them all the time.
Well, I turned it up so I could hear it better and it was great!
Can't get any better driving music than that!
We were listening to some absolute gems in the car earlier.
Oh yeah, those oldies but goldies?.
you know it! We had the volume up to max setting.
That must have been loud!
it was but it was so worth it.
It's the only way to listen to the classic's really.
I think Ash might be on to me.
Oh no! Really?
Yeah, he was asking me all these questions and I didn't know how to answer them.
what did you do?
I just played dumb and said I didn't know to anything he asked me.
Well I highly doubt that worked well
I had a great time camping and I hope we can do it again soon
for sure, maybe we can go camping again when the weather gets better.
this time I will make sure I bring my fishing rod with me so I wont be so bored
just make sure you check everything before you leave the house this time
I definitely will
I had another good day at work today
What did you do?
My demolition company blew up a bridge
The old main street bridge?
Yes, we're making room for the new one being built.
I can't wait for the new bridge to be done
I had a great time at work today.
Did you doing anything special?
The bridge was being demolished today. So the crew had me do the honour of pressing the button.
That must have been a lot of fun.
Yeah it was great being able to live a childhood dream.
You must have had a weird childhood.
I need to call Animal Control.
Why must you do that?
My friend's dog has been suffering for days! They're starving the poor thing!
That is a good reason to call Animal Control.
I threw a bone to the dog.
Give the dog something more substantial and call Animal Control.
I can't believe they left this dog here with nothing to eat.
That makes no sense at all.
This is so strange because it's not like them.
Have you been feeding it?
I've been thrown bones in scraps.
You don't have any dog food?
My friends dog is looking so weak and ill.
What's wrong with him?
He's hungry, they're not feeding him properly
Why hasn't anyone fed him?
No idea! I threw a bone over to him before going to the shops to get him some proper dog food.
Maybe you should be the dogs owner and not your friend if they can't look after the poor thing.
I just kicked off at my friend.
Why did you do that?
Because he hasn't ben feeding his dog properly, it looked so hungry.
why are they not feeding it?
he claims they are but it looks worse and worse each time I see him, i gave him a bone last time.
he'll need more than just a bone if he's that hungry.
Did I ever tell you about how I met my husband?
No, how did you meet him?
Well, he used to be my neighbour when we were kids.
No kidding! You've known him for all these years?
Yeah, we were best friends growing up and ended up getting married after all these years!
You guys must be soul mates!
It is such a typical movie like love story, marrying my neighbour that I have been friends with since we were kids.
Yeah I don't really know of anyone else doing that.
It is also weird because we dated other people off and on for years before we got together.
You guys were just meant to be I suppose.
Yeah it feels really great to be married to your best friend.
I am so happy for you guys!
Tracey and I did very well working together on the assignment.
Really? I thought you two were arch enemies.
Well, we weren't exactly friends but we were not enemies.
Surprised that you could collaborate with her.
We had no choice, it was a work assignment.
That's awesome Kendall!
Kids were trying to get into the restricted section of the library again today.
Is that not allowed?.
Of course not its restricted.
Then why have a restricted section at all if people can't go into it.
Because there's many old and rare books in there!
But it’s a public library.
If I see anyone trying to get into the restricted section again I am going to lose my mind!
were they're many trying to get in?
yeah 6, the usual suspects.
Those lot are always trying to sneak past and into the restricted section.
I know it drives me up the wall.
Would have thought your strict telling off the first time would have been enough to keep them away.
I picked Robin up from the airport.  I put her luggage in my trunk and drove her home.
Which airport did you pick her up from?
Burbank Airport.  It's the one closest to her house.
Where did she fly in from?
She had taken a trip to San Francisco to visit her sister.
Nice. Sister-bonding time.
Have you met the new kid, Barry? Oh my god...he is so good looking. He looks like a young Neil Diamond.
No, I want to meet him now, though. I suppose you already have dibs on him.
Of course, I do! I invited him to be my date for the party this weekend and he accepted.
Trust you to find the best looking guy and get a date the same day. I'm jealous!
Finders, keepers. You know what they say. I can't wait. I have to get a new outfit, for sure.
I'll go to the mall with you, when you go. I could use a new outfit, too.
I'm already putting the new moves on the new boy at school.
You and all the other girls.
That's why I have to move quick.
I don't think you were quick enough.
Why do you say that?
Because he already gave me his number.
Well, I'm sorry to be the bearer of sad tidings, but, last night, the dog passed away.
Oh no! I can't believe it. Poor dog!
I'm sorry. He looks like he was at peace. He passed away in his sleep. He was probably chasing rabbits in his dreams.
Man, life is so short. It really makes you think.
I want to let everyone know some sad news.
What happened?
The dog died last night.
No! how did it die?
It was hit by a car.
Oh man, that is so sad.
The reception last night was fantastic.
Was it everything you were hoping it would be?
It was and much more! It was such a lavish event. 
Oh I'm quite jealous of you now, I want to go to a grand reception like that
If you ever get the chance t go to one you have to! If I get the chance to attend another you can be my plus one. 
I'll hold you to that!
How was it at the reception last week?
Absolutely fantastic, it was a great time I had so much fun.
Was it a fancy event?
It was indeed, I was all dressed up and looking my best if I do say so myself.
I'm sure you did, you have to go all out on your outfit for grand events like that.
You're not wrong there!
Last night we had the reception to welcome the incoming college president.
I saw an article about it this morning in the local news blog, looked fancy.
It was, we had a champagne and a raw bar and a quartet and there were quiet a few speeches.
Sounds wonderful, weren't you the chair of the committee planning it.
I was, we had been planning and preparing for months.
I am glad it was such a success, I think its bodes well for the incoming president.
I am so proud of this grand event tonight.
You ought to be. This reception that you prepared is amazing!
Thank you. I'm glad you liked it. I really worked hard for this
I can't wait to see everyone's expression when they come in.
I hope the big bosses with approve of it.
Yes, I'm sure they will love it.
So I'm gonna have to do my test again.
Oh no did you fail or something?
Yeah I didn't really follow the instructions at all and ended up getting an F.
Oh no, are you actually going to prepare and follow the instructions the next time you do the test?
Yeah definitely, going to make sure I don't get an F again
Maybe in future you'll just always follow the instructions for tests.
I can't believe that I failed the test.
How did you fail the test?
I didn't read the instructions and got an F.
Did you talk to the teacher about it?
Yeah, she's not giving me a make up
Oh, that sucks.
I received an F on my test.
What happened?
I reviewed the test, and at first, I didn't understand what I did wrong.
Did you ask the teacher to explain why you received an F?
I asked my teacher. She told me that I didn't follow the directions.
Next time, don't rush. Try to read the directions first.
I brought home a new dog today.
Oh cool! What did the family think?
They love him and I think the dog's already feeling like we're his pack.
Did he settle in already?
Yes, right up on the couch and wagging his tail.
Lucky you to have a new family member.
I have got a new friend.
Oh really? What's your friend's name?
We haven't named him yet. We bought a puppy from the pet store.
Oh, I love dogs! My dog's name is Bam.
Cool. I love The Flintstones. Maybe I'll name my dog Pebbles.
How is Casey doing? I heard he bumped his head pretty hard.
He feel and gave his head a bad knock I tried helping him up to walk but he was so dizzy he couldn't even stand.
That's worrying how did he make it back?
I had to carry him myself.
Just as well you were there to help him.
Very true, he was not in a good way at all after bumping his head.
Do you know f Casey is feeling better after hitting his head on the pavement?
He was feeling a little dizzy and not really feeling very well.
Bless him was it really bad?
Well I had to carry him because he couldn't walk, he really wasn't in a good way.
I can't believe how hot it is. That water hit the spot.
Simple, but works. Though I wish I had a bit of lemon to add to it; a little flavor ya know.
Yeah, I normally like to add one of those little packs to my water- tea, grape, something.
You ready to get back to our game?
Yep. Lets finish up this game before it gets hotter!
I'm gonna pour myself a glass of water.
Sure, go ahead. Take as much as you want.
Thanks. I'm really thirsty.
I bet. You've been doing errands all day.
This water is really quenching my thirst.
Yeah, I figure that's what water was meant to do.
I'm really thirsty.  Do you want anything?
No, but you go ahead.
I'll just pour a glass and have a sip of water.
Drink up.  I'd tell you if I were thirsty.
It seems kind of rude.
Don't be silly; it's not like you're drinking in front of someone who's dehydrated in the desert.
I'm so extraordinarily thirsty!
Then get a glass of water!
Thank you! Oh, this is so delicious!
Yea, water always tastes good when you're thirsty.
This remodelled house is going to sell quickly, I know it.
You've been working on this old dump for months now, Remy give up!
No Way. So how does it look anyway?
It looks a lot better than when you started. You really have some skill Remy.
Yeah, this baby is going to do all my work for me.
I hope you make your money back at least, Remy.
I think i have a ways to go with the remodel
what did you think you were going to work on today?
i was thinking about redoing the cabinets and fixing up the bathroom
i think that you're getting close to finishing up the remodel for your house
I think things are looking good in here
So any good stories?
Yeah, but is a true one. There was a kid who believed if he a dug a hole in the sand he can reach China.
Yeah? So what so special about that?
In his digging adventures he unleashed creatures from another world?
You mean China?
No, it was an opening to another dimension that can be closed. There lies a problem.....
I have a great story to tell you about hiking.
Lets get this fire going and I would love to hear it.
Lets go get some wood to burn.
Sounds good. I cant wait to hear the story what's it about?
Its about the time I went hiking and got stuck on the mountain.
OH, wow that sounds like a great story lets hurry.
Jordan and I have become very good at reading each other.
Like understanding what the other person is thinking?
Yeah, I can tell if he is uncomfortable by his body movements.
Interesting, do you think that's because you've been dating for awhile?
Probably. Still pretty cool though, to have that kind of connection.
Yeah, I guess so.
they had so many questions to answer to
did they give thoughtful questions?
yes I believe so, it was easy for me to engage with them
Im sure they appreciate your help
I hope I'm doing a good job
you're awesome at your job, Remy
Anything regarding  this new start up I can answer!
Really what's it about?
It's about a vr program that helps educate children in third world countries. it's supposed to simulate a classroom setting.
So are things automated or are there real teachers?
Oh we have actual professors, it's more convenient to them  because they don't have to travel aboard to teach kids
Wow that's amazing!
I was answering questions throughout.
Why have you been doing that?
They had so many questions and I was happy to help.
That is so nice of you. You're a good man
Thanks man
Keep it up
Remember how i was complaining about the empty lot on my street that was full of garbage?
Yeah, it was such an eye sore.
I want to turn it into a community garden but I knew I couldn't do it alone
Yeah, that would be a big job.
Well I have been working with the city council and this weekend I joined a bunch of volunteers to take the first step and clean it out.
Hey that's great.  I want to come volunteer for when you put the garden in.
I know we don't communicate that much but i need your help
this is true.  you never talk to the volunteers
I know but I think it is time to realize that we need to join forces to help fight against all this work
Why is that ?
There is a lot of work here I cannot take on my self and I really need your help
Okay I am on it.  I will try and contact some other people in the volunteer group as well
I am starting to eat a healthy breakfast.
That's great...you need to eat healthier.
I was starving this morning. I ate healthy, but I ate a lot of food.
Well, what did you eat.
I had six eggs, scrambled.
It's healthy, but way too much!
I had the biggest and tastiest breakfast of all time this morning.
What is taking you so long to host another one of your brunches,
I've just been busy and haven't had the energy to cook so much food.
We can come over and help you if you need it.
It sounds like you just want to have a brunch over here?
Great people and great food has that effect on me.
I'm so full!
Did you go out for breakfast?
No I made breakfast here! I made an omelette.
But I thought you were trying to eat healthy?
I am! I only used egg whites, and I used mozzarella cheese which is low in fat.
Oh that does sound good. Next time invite me over!
Good morning!
Morning Alex.
I am feel very hungry this morning
You said you wanted some healthy breakfast yesterday.
Yes i did. I made some already.
wow that is fast
The convict is guilty and its my job to make sure justice is made.
Were you able to bring the case to trial?
Yes, the judge just dictated that.
I am glad for you and for the family of the victim.
Yeah, they have suffered enough and its my duty to defend them.
You are so great, I admire you.
I had to bring the convict to trial this morning.
Why did they make you do it?
Since I'm the prosecutor on the case, I had to be on the one to do it.
Oh, I get it. Well, how did the case go?
We're only into the opening arguments.
Can I stop by court tomorrow?
I thanked Jesse for letting me borrow his dad's war medal.
Is that really something for Jesse to loan out?
I guess not, because I left it at the event and almost forgot about it.
Why were to pretending to have gotten a war medal?
It was just a part of an outfit for a historical re-enactment.
I would be so vexed if I found out my son had loaned out my medal like that.
I left your Dad's medal at the banquet hall, Jesse.
Ash, that is an invaluable piece.
Whew. I thought I would owe you a lot of money.
I mean it is priceless.
Great. So I don't owe you anything.
I mean you can never repay me, oh never mind.
Is this going to be your last day?
Yeah....Someone apparently reported my performance as being low.
Yes, that was me Skylar. You've held our team back on major projects multiple times.
What! I can't believe you did that!
Skylar, this is real life. You're performance has affected our team, our bonuses. We've all pulled overtime to keep our jobs and make up for you.
I'm glad I'm leaving, I don't want to work with people like you.
I'm sorry that I got you fired but I couldn't handle picking up your slack anymore, you are lazy!
It wasn't that bad! and if you had jsut told me how you felt I could have changed. You didn't need to get me fired
I didn't' think you'd ever change
Well I would have if it meant keeping my job
Well I wish you luck in finding another job.
Whatever. I hope you get fired too
I will need to find a replacement for Skylar as son as possible!
Why, what happened with Skylar?
I fired her, she wasn't doing her job the way she supposed to.
I thought she was a good worker until now you've said that.
She was too lazy and never got the job done in time!
Well, at least now you can find someone that works better.
I'm so excited about the role in the play!
I know! It's such a big role, it will be a great stepping stone.
I heard that over 300 people will be there at the play!
That is a big crowd for this little town.
It'll be so exciting.
I'm excited too! I feel special knowing someone who has such a big role in this play.
I worked so hard to get that role that I cant believe I got it!
I knew you would get it because you are a natural.
My sister played the part two years ago and I helped her practice for it.
It shows how much work you put into getting the part because no one even came close to beating you.
I really can't sleep to night.
Why?
I'm too excited because I got the role in the play.
Whoa, that's awesome man.
I'm sorry I stole Aubrey's wallet. I just really needed money, and didn't have time to do anything else. Her wallet was just sitting there.
That doesn't mean it's a free for all! Aubrey worked hard for that money. I thought you were her friend.
I am! I will pay her back I promise.
You never have money, that's why you stole from Aubrey.
I'll figure out a way to get it to her, I promise. I don't want this to ruin mine and Aubrey's friendship.
Good luck with that.
I am so ashamed of something I did a while back.
What did you do, Remy?
You remember that time Aubrey came over to my house and she lost her wallet?
Yes, she freaked out, I remember. She was crying.
Well, I was in a bind and I needed a quick few dollars so I stole her wallet out of her car window.
That is so bad. You need to apologize!
I'm going to tell everyone what is going on.
The company is failing.
The business hasn't sold anything in a year, Robin looked over the charts and confirmed it.
This is true.
These are big issues, we will need to do layoffs.
I'm not happy about that.
I choreographed the Christmas Pageant for the school this year.
That sounds like a lot of work dealing with kids.
It was a lot of work. One kid, Taylor, I had to pay special attention to, to make sure that they stayed in place and didn't wander off.
That does not sound like a fun time corralling rowdy kids.
I actually loved the choreography part though.
Well then I guess it was a trade-off.
The Christmas pageant is by far the most fun I have working with the children.
You seem like you love it, and the children really listen to you.
Taylor was giving me a run for my money, but she kept me on my toes!
I saw that, but Taylor ended up staying in her place during the songs!
Yes she did, and that is why I do this, so I can help the children.
And that is why you are perfect for the job.
I have been giving Taylor so extra help.
Was everything okay?
Yes, she was just having some trouble remembering what to do.
You are a great teacher.
I just love working on the choreography with the children.
I am sure it will turn out great.
So how was your day? We had a great time at the zoo!
That was the most relaxed I've felt in a long time. Thank you so much for taking my kids.
Oh I loved it as much as they did! They were so into learning about all the animals.
Well that's fantastic. Hopefully they didn't talk you into buying them too much junk food.
Just a some cotton candy and ice creams. I enjoyed it too. It was fun to be a kid again.
Well anytime you want to take them anywhere just let me know! I could definitely use an afternoon like that again.
After walking that mile, I can really see things from Skylar's side.
I'm glad you were able to open your eyes to the struggles Skylar faces. How does it feel?
I feel burdened and tired. Do you think that's how Skylar feels all the time?
She probably does, yes.
That must be very tiring.
It would be good for you to consider how she feels in the future.
My face is so beat up right now, but you should see the other guy.
What happened?
I joined a gang on my first day of school. It's been cool but we have a lot of enemies.
So you got in a fight with a rival gang?
Yeah, they were mad over nothing too.
I think you should try to get out of the gang if you can.
Wow I cannot believe I almost hit that deer!
Did you have to slam the brakes so hard?
I mean yeah unless you wanted deer guts on the car.
You were looking down at your phone and you would have seen it sooner if you weren't.
I'm sorry, I'll try not to do that again.
I would really like to get home in one piece, thanks.
I almost got in a bad car accident last night.
What happened?
I almost hit a deer.
That would've been bad news because deer's ruin your car.
I've heard of that and got lucky.
You got very lucky my friend.
I almost hit a deer last night!
Yikes! I've almost done that before. Was he running across the road?
No, he was just standing there in the middle. Luckily my headlights caught his eyes before it was too late.
Did you have to swerve out of the way?
No I just slammed on the brakes. I stopped maybe three feet from him. Then he nonchalantly walked away.
That's a truly fearless deer!
There was a deer crossing the street at the Parkway as I came home.
Yeah, deer cross at night a lot.
I knew they did, but I had never seen one up close.
It's good you were paying attention then.
I just saw something rustling and it caught my eye.
It's a good thing you saw that.
I tried to not cry at the funeral.
That must have been hard. I know you two were close.
He was my best friend. The sadness was overwhelming.
You shouldn't prevent yourself from crying.
I had to at least try not to cry just so that my crying wouldn't create a scene.
I hope you can heal from this.
My best friend died. I went to his funeral. I was so heartbroken it was hard to hold back the tears.
It's okay to cry. I am sorry about your friend.
Taylor was the best friend anyone could have asked for. We grew up together.
Taylor died? What happened?
He took some bad drugs. His mom found him dead in his bathroom.
How devastating.
I left Kai today and went home without him.
Did you two get into an argument?
No, but I've always thought of Kai as a weak person and I'm tired of being dragged down by him.
That's too bad.
We started the race pretty good, but Kai kept slowing us down.
Did you all make it to the end?
We left Kai after she stopped for awhile.
You didn't go back for her?
No, she was so slow that we just moved on without her.
That's not good, a team should stay together.
I can't believe Riley told on med to my mom.
Maybe Riley told her because you went to far with it.
My mom isn't going to punish me. She just told me that I needed to stop.
What did Riley ever do to you?
Riley is just a little brat. I can't stand brats.
You should try and be nicer to people in the future.
This was a great new routine to try. Thanks so much for being great!
Of course Cameron. Its always nice to see your new comedy routines.
They take a lot of work to build up and are super hard to make daily.
I know, they definitely take some time to perfect and craft.
Yeah of course. Thanks for being a great friend.
No problem man.
Well friends I hope you had fun tonight.
It was a wonderful evening, the laughter was never lacking.
I hope I have not failed in something, my intention is to make you laugh.
You are an excellent comedian, you should do this more often.
I'm thinking of going back to comedy.
I would surely support you friend.
That new comedy routine I did last night turned out very well.
That was fresh! Everyone had a good laugh.
I was surprised! I was hesitant on changing my lines.
You sent everyone home with some laughs
I'm glad I did.
Keep up the good work.
I cannot believe I almost missed my wedding!
Why were you sleeping?
I had a long night.
Did you party too hard?
You know me too well.
Too bad those days are over.
I was so tired. That nap did me so much good before I had to make that drive to the event.
How far was the event from your home?
It was a two hour drive.
Wow. I didn't realize it was that far. You needed that nap before hitting the road.
Yes. If I didn't take the nap first I wouldn't have enjoyed the event.
I'm glad that you had a good time.
Oh Boy! How did you sleep? I'm still tired.
Not to bad. Sleeping in the car is always fun.
I'm glad you came with me on this adventure.
Yes. I've always wanted to go to a large concert.
Well are you taking the first turn at the wheel or me? We've got to be in Des Moines in five hours.
I'll drive for a bit since you're still sleepy.
My Canada trip was great. I actually ended up visiting Aubrey's relatives.
Oh wow. How'd you make that happen?
I contacted them before I left because I knew I was going to be in their area.
Cool. I bet they were so happy to see you. It's been such a long time.
It really has. And, you know, it's funny how much they remind me of Aubrey.
I bet! That must be kind of surreal when you're trying to carry on a conversation.
I saw Aubrey's family in Canada.
Wow, what was the occasion?
I was on holiday there and staying nearby.
Was Aubrey there as well?
No, Aubrey wasn't there, so we talked a lot behind her back.
Hope it was all good things.
I had such a good time visiting my friend's relatives last weekend!
That sounds great! What was the occasion?
I was just on vacation and they live there! It was nice to catch up
I bet it was. It's always nice seeing people you know
Yeah I haven't seen them in a while, so it was really great to catch up
That sounds like a nice addition to your trip!
How were your grades?
Not bad, I suppose you got the top grades in the class again?
Well, yes.
You know everything there is to know.
I don't think that's possible.
You come close.
I don't want to brag, but I constantly get the top grades in the class.
Well, that's great. You'll definitely make high honours!
Yes. For sure. I always know everything that's necessary.
Well, sounds like it's from studying hard.
Oh, it is. Plus I'm pretty smart.
I'm glad. You should have no trouble getting into the college of your choice!
I almost lost Kendall in the store today!
Oh no, I'm glad you didn't though! What happened?
She let go of my hand and started running like a crazy person up and down the aisles!
She was too fast for you?
Yes! I'm 37 years old! I haven't been able to run since I was a teenager!
I hear that! You have a sneaky little rascal on your hands, Riley!
The waiter was so amazing I think I am going to leave a big tip!
He really was a good waiter. I'm sure a nice tip would mean a lot to him.
I remember being a waiter and always wanting just one person to leave a generous tip and it would make my week!
It's great that you can be that person for someone.
I hope he really is in need of it.
Considering he is a waiter I'm sure he does.
I caught up with Sydney the other day. I was nervous to see her.
Oh yeah, how was it seeing her again?
It was fine we let bygones be bygones. I made sure to help with the bill this time.
I bet you did. How did you split it?
I paid the tax and tip. We had great service so I left a nice tip.
That sounds fair. Do you plan to meet up with her again?
I was really impressed with how well the server did tonight.
Did you really have to give him a thousand dollar tip though?
I thought he was cute and I wanted to impress him.
I don't think you needed to give him all that money though and you still need a new car.
I can just ask my dad to buy me one.
Must be nice to be rich I guess.
I love playing music with my former band.
Cool, was it a rock or pop band?
It's a rock band, I love playing music with my rock band, and we played with our friend.
That's good, hope it was cool?
Yeah, dope music.
I trust you Jan, you are good.
Do you know I am in a rock band?
No, since when?
For a year now.
I would love to watch you.
You are welcome to come watch us play this weekend.
Thank you, I can't wait.
I convinced the band to try playing with my friend who does some garage music.
Did the band enjoy it?
Yes and my friend was actually quite good.
Will you ask him to join the band?
I'm thinking of having him as a backup in case a member can't make it.
That guy must be so happy. I'm glad you'll give him a chance.
What song should we all play next?
How about Sweet Child of Mine?
Wow, I love that song, do we have the right equipment to play it though?
We sure do, I brought over an extra guitar.
Great, lets play it now!
I love being in a rock band, I feel like I am on top of the world!
You are incredible my friend, I love playing music with you.
You are also very talented and contribute enormously to the band.
This band would be nothing without you Jan.
That means a lot to me. You are an extraordinary friend.
The feeling is mutual.
I just adopted a cat from the shelter on the corner next to the fitness centre.
That's amazing. Is it cute?
My friend Riley went with me. She helped me pick out the cat. The first thing I heard out of its mouth is meow so I told Riley I'll name it Meow.  She just laughed.
That's pretty funny.
It's the cutest little white cat with deep blue eyes.
That's sounds adorable. I want to play with Meow.
Riley came to see my new adopted cat.
What is her name?
Her name is Gizmo.
That's a fun name,
I thought so too, Riley just laughed at it.
That's not very nice.
We finally adopted our new cat today!
Fantastic! I love cats, is it a boy or a girl?
It's a feisty little orange girl, and she loves veggies.
Are you serious? What did you name her?
We named her carrot! She has a thing for carrots and she's orange, we thought it would be cute, when I told Riley she laughed.
That's hilarious, I absolutely love that name, it is indeed fitting!
I just got back from my physics class.
Cool, how did it go?
Great! I aced the test and got a high grade!
Congratulations! You must have studied a lot!
Yes, I am so relieved. Reviewing my notes helped me do well.
Good job, I am proud of you.
I'm so glad this physics class is over
I liked physics. I had a great professor.
My professor was the worst. The class was so boring.
It's sad a bad teacher can ruin a subject completely.
Well, I got a great grade so at least that done with.
That's awesome. Congratulations.
I am so into science and I think that it is something for me. I truly enjoy it immensely.
Right, how do you like the curriculum so far?
Its nice. It resonates well with my learning style and I think that overall it is something I can see myself doing for a long period of time.
How are your grades in the class?
They are really good. Just got an A on the midterm and I have a 90 in the class.
I'm so proud of you. That's awesome.
I aced that test!
What test?
The physics exam.
Is that the one that you had been studying for?
Yes, I studied for it for a week.
Good for you then!
I decided to do something about our lawn. It looked bad compared to the neighbours.
It couldn't have been that bad!
No, it was. Ours was overgrown, so I mowed it.
Well I bet your glad that's done!
Yup! I'm sure the neighbour is happy as well!
Sounds like it's time for you to relax with a lemonade. We need to get together and chill out!
My grass is growing so fast.
What happened?
It grows in literally three days twice as tall as when I cut it.
Oh man, that's insane.
Can you kill it for me?
Yep, and I'll plant AstroTurf.
I ended up having to mow the grass yesterday.
What happened to your yard man that normally does it.
He has been sick with the flu and the grass was getting overgrown.
Good thing you cut it, if it gets to long you will have them snakes again.
I pulled up to my home and took a long look at my property.
What did you see?
I had not been attending to my property, especially the grounds.
Have you done anything about it?
The grass was overgrown so my first piece of business was to mow the grass.
First things first I always say.
I want to get to school early today.
Who wants to get to school early?
I want to get a good seat.
There are good seats in school?
I want to be able to sit in the front.
You are such a nerd.
Hello, I saved you a spot next to me.
You must have got here early in the morning to get me a spot.
I did, I was the first one in, I love school so much.
I wish I could arrive earlier in the morning as I also love school.
I live nearby so it's easy for me.
I on the other hand live far from the school.
I think my psych professor is attracted to me.
Why would you think that?
I got school super early today and sat in the front. I was wearing a super short skirt and he kept looking at my legs.
Why did you get to class so early?
I always do. I love school, that's why! I want the best seat.
Well I'm sure your professor is glad about that!
I went to the movies with Jan last night.
Were you two out on a date?
Not officially, but I whispered something into her ear midway through the movie. I asked her out to dinner.
What did she say?
She said yes! I'm actually getting ready to meet her at the restaurant right now.
Let's go to the store for a soda.
I could use a drink.
I'm so thirsty, I'm going break open the seal and gulp down the coke.
You weren't kidding.
Nothing keeps me from my coke.
You're an animal.
I'm so thirsty.
Let's go buy some drinks.
Sounds good. I got a bottle of coke.
Let's have a drink.
Okay, I'll open mine to drink it.
That's so refreshing.
Jan looked parched.
Was she okay?
She broke both of her arms so was unable to drink.
That's awful!
I helped her, since her arms were injured I poured a glass of water into her mouth.
You're a good friend.
Jan needs lots of help at the moment.
How come?
She broke both of her arms.
How unfortunate!
I have been having to feed her and get her drinks when she is thirsty.
You're so helpful.
I had to hand feed Jan her water today.
Why can't she drink it herself?
She broke both arms and can't even lift a cup yet.
Oh wow. She's going to need a full time nurse.
I'm glad I was there because she was alone for a while and thirsty.
You're a good friend to take care of her like that.
I was trying hard not to spill water over Jan.
Why would you spill water on Jan?
She has broken both of her arms so can't drink for herself.
You should buy a straw.
That's a smart idea.
No problem.
Jan just recently got into an accident.
Oh really? What kind of accident?
An accident where she broke both arms.
Ouch! How is she now?
She was just thirsty at first and I filled Jan's mouth with water.
How nice of you to help Jan out even when she is injured.
I tried to move around a bit more today and failed miserably.
What did you try to do?
I just wanted to go for a short walk, but not a minute after I started, I got so tired and winded. And the pain got worse.
Oh, wow. Well it was really an extensive surgery you had. Maybe take it easy until the doctor actually tells you that you can start walking again. It's way to early and you shouldn't be pushing yourself like that.
I know, I regret the attempt but I was itching to get outside again!
In time, Robin. In time.
I think I pushed myself a bit too hard.
Oh? What happened?
You know I've been recovering from surgery at home, right?
Yeah, did you follow the doctor's advice?
I did. I started to get some mild exercise after the recommended rest, but became really tired.
It's best to rest another week before trying that again.
It was nice to go for a walk around the park today.
Yeah, it was a beautiful day, not too cold and not too hot.
Just perfect weather. It was my first walk after the operation so I was tired afterwards.
It's good you are getting out and working the legs.
They felt pretty good. I just need to strengthen them again.
You can do it.
I went on a few dates with Taylor. She's the one for me but I haven't heard from her.
What do you mean you have not heard from her?
I wanted to take her on a weekend getaway and she never got back to me. Its been two weeks.
Wow, what did you do to make her not to talk to you?
I told her my wife and I are getting back together but she's cool with me going out with you.
Dude, you can't do that. Taylor doesn't flow that way!
I'm going to concentrate on the ball.
Make sure you use your hands on this.
I'll do this before throwing it into the net and scoring.
You know scoring so well.
It's all about training.
You got this.
I can't believe I won us the game last night.
You were amazing, what was going through your head on that last shot?
Nothing, honestly, I was just focused on the ball in my hands.
Wow, that's seriously so cool.
Yeah, then I released it and made the shot.
I was so happy when you made it last night.
That was the most intense game I ever played.
It sounds like it, did you end up winning?
Yes actually, by more than 3 points!
Wow you guys mush have been good!
I played basketball.
Were you successful?
I did my best.
What do you consider your best?
Each time I got the ball I concentrated on it in my hands before throwing it into the net and scoring.
Goal!
I know I can do this.
Go, Sydney! I believe in you!
I will concentrate everything on this throw and score!
Go fight go! Finish it with MVP!
Yes! Thank you!
Congratulations!
I was so rude today.
What did you do?
I was in a rush and cut the line at the bakery.
Did anyone complain or give you mean looks?
No, the line was full of children and they didn't say anything.
I hope you don't think it's alright to do that again, it's very impolite.
Everyone at the bakery is way too slow!
Did you cause another scene at the bakery?
If I didn't go to the front of the line I was going to be late.
I don't think you should cut in line.
What do you know, you're slow too.
I can see why I'm you're only friend.
I managed to get the cake at the bakery that we wanted.
Great, I didn't think you would get it on time.
I know. I actually had to cut the line and felt really bad about it.
Oh, well, I hope it wasn't too big of a deal.
It wasn't. It's just not something I'd do every day.
Well, I'm glad you got the right cake. I can't wait to see it.
I feel bad. I cut in the line at the bakery today because I was in a rush.
Was it a really obvious cut in line or something kind of subtle?
I noticed people not paying attention, so I snuck in in front of them.
I guess that could be worse. It's not like you shoved them out of the way!!
True. But I still feel bad about it. I don't normally do things like that.
And as bad as I feel, I won't do it again either!
I didn't want to do it but I had to.
What are you talking about?
I had to cut to the front of the line at the bakery.
That is not cool man.
Kendall keeps on rubbing my chin for good luck.
Why would Kendall do that?
I have no idea, it's a very odd gesture.
Very odd indeed.
I am going to ask Kendall to stop.
Kendall just rubbed my chin.
Why did he do that?
He said it is a good luck but I find it weird.
I have never heard such a thing.
He is one weird guy.
It must be a superstitious belief.
I feel so guilty for going out with friends for a while.
Why would you feel guilty?
Sydney's mother found Sydney unresponsive while I was gone and now I regret leaving.
You can't blame yourself for what happened.
Sydney's mom wasn't happy either.
She's a mother. You have to give her some leeway.
I wish I hadn't gone out with my friends.
It's not your fault that Sydney took all those pills.
His mom wasn't too happy after finding him alone and unconscious.
That must've been really hard for her.
I can't even imagine.
A mother's worst nightmare. Hopefully, he pulls through.
There is downed power line over there.
Yeah, what should we do?
I don't we need to call someone this is dangerous.
You should call the electric company they will know what to do.
Your right give me your phone.
Here you go!
There is a power line down the road that fell and I would like to call in to report it.
Okay. is it near any sort of trees and stuff?
No, it's not.
Oh that's a relief to hear.
Are you guys going to be on your way?
Yes, we are on the way now.
I was driving down the street and had to stop because a power line was in the road.
I hope you stayed far away from it.
I did. I turned the car around to go another way and called the electric company.
I hope they got there quickly before anyone got hurt.
Same here.
I think I have everything I need. Can you help me carry this stuff out to the car?
Sure, are you heading out this weekend?
Yes, I need some peace and quiet. I'm going to the mountains to stay in the cabin.
I know you've had a lot on your plate between work and your family. That will be nice.
Yes, I'm really looking forward to just relaxing.
Well be safe and let me know when you get there.
I was very thankful for Lee's help.
He's a great friend and he's always been good at math.
Math has never been the subject for me.
Most people don't like math so we're all grateful for Lee.
I'm inviting him to dinner on Friday would you like to come?
Anytime I hear dinner and an invitation I'm in.
I'm having trouble with my homework.
I'm sorry, maybe Lee can help.
How is Lee with algebra?
Actually, pretty good.
Great, I hope he can take a look.
I am sure he will.
I just can't get through this homework.
Let Lee check it out. Maybe her can help?
I'd really appreciate that.
I am sure he can show you how to do it.
I think Lee pity's me.
I'm sure he just likes to help people.
I owe Lee a big favour after what he did for me today.
What did he do for you?
He helped me get my homework done. I was having a hard time figuring out how to do it.
Lee's great with schoolwork. He's always happy to help out.
The cops are going to find me! I know they know what kind of car I drive
You're disgusting! Just give the poor children up. What did they ever do to deserve this
It happened to me when I was a child. It's only fair. I just can't get caught
Well if you don't then I'm going to turn you in. So just let the kids go.
I thought we were friends? How could you do that?
That was before I knew all this? how could I ever be friends with a monster
I was at my grandparents' house yesterday and while they were out running errands, I took a look at their coin collections.
Oh yeah? How many do they have?
So many I couldn't keep track!
Wow, that's cool. I collect seashells from all the beaches I go to.
That's awesome! I started collecting rocks after being inspired by their coin collection!
Cool! I hope you find some pretty ones!
I know. I am so blown away but this collection.
I hope she has them insured. That's a gold mine.
You're not kidding and it's real gold!
Well, I can store them in my safe for her if she wants.
No, that's cool. I told her to exchange them all for Bitcoin.
Great idea. Much more secure but does she remember her private key?
Remy paid more attention to my dog than me!
Well, the dog is adorable.
But not as adorable as me
No, maybe Remy was nervous
No, he really acted strange.
Want me to ask him what's up?
I spent some time with Remy last night, we were on a date.
Did you have a good time?
We did, but Alex was paying more attention to my dog than me.
You're dog is adorable!
I know, but I would've liked to have a chat with Remy.
That is fair.
I went on a date with that guy Remy.
Oh yeah. That guy. How did it go?
I cooked at home, and he spent the entire time playing with my dog.
So he didn't help cook?
No he didn't. It made me think this is what it would be like when we marry. Me working, him playing around.
Well, if you have kids he'd be a good dad.
I'm glad Remy came over for our date.
Was your dog there?
Yes, Fluffy was at home too.
Did Fluffy and Remy get along?
Yes, Remy spent more time with the dog than me!
That's not a surprise.
I'm in so much pain ever since I broke my arm.
Did you see a doctor?
Yes, I went to Remy, he thinks I have a large fracture in my elbow.
Did you get any painkillers?
Yes, but I really had to give Remy a lot of expressions of pain.
I'm in a lot of pain.
What did the doctor's say?
The nurse called in Remy to have a look at me and he said I was looking like I was in a lot of pain.
Were you?
Yes, I couldn't stop the expressions of pain in my face.
I hope you feel better soon.
This oatmeal is a little soggy but at least it's warm.
That's good, I bet you wouldn't want your oatmeal cold and soggy.
Of course not! I want a healthy and nutritious breakfast.
And of course tasty and delicious.
You bet! Let's sit down and eat.
I'll grab the bowls and spoons.
And this is how I can tell that the oats are the right temperature.
Gross. You put your finger in them?
Well, yes. I am going to be the one eating them after all. What, do you think I would use a thermometer?
Hm, I don't know, but putting your finger in wet food is definitely gross.
I'm making breakfast.
Put the oats in there.
The temperature needs to be right.
Yes that's true.
I usually feel my oats to see if they're the right temperature.
Go for it.
I am making oats for breakfast.
I never get the temperature right on those things.
It's tough, I have to make sure to get it just right, and I need to hurry before work.
Yeah for breakfast I just eat a banana.
You need more food in your system, oats is a better choice.
I'll think about it.
My mom gave Sash my number.
Why did Sasha want your number?
My mom gave it to Sasha so we can stay in contact.
Are you going to call Sasha?
Of course, I was a little sad when I forgot to get her number.
Seems like Sasha was thinking ahead.
Sarah got my number from my mom. She's so sweet. I forgot to give it to her.
She doesn't have it already?
We were neighbours and I never really hung out with her. But she wants to stay in touch.
Well you'll have more phone friends for college now.
It will definitely be nice to have more people to write and talk to.
That's great you've got a bunch of people behind you.
I'm still in shock in dealing with this tremendous pain.
I'm so sorry this happened to you, I know you're upset.
I was having such a great season and the team is winning also, Cameron said I might need an MRI.
It was going to be our year finally.
I have that feeling to, hopefully everyone comes together and is able to still deliver.
Hopefully, but it's going to be hard without you.
This is a great day at the funfair.
Let's go on the roller coaster.
I don't know. It looks dangerous. How about the merry-go-round?
What are you, five? Let's go, it'll be fun and it's plenty safe.
O.K. If you say so.
Come on, I'll hold your hand.
Even though I was big coward about roller coasters, I rode it fearfully, after much persuasion from my friends.
See it wasn't that bad.
Yes it was. I wet my pants I was so scared. I was just screaming the whole time.
You made it though.
You mean like I didn't die?
Pretty much.
The men in justice system asked me why I committed the robbery.
What was your response to them?
I only justified the answer to why I committed the robbery!
Were they convinced?
It seems so!
I just lost my job and needed some money to eat.
That's not a good excuse to commit robbery.
Hunger will make you do strange things.
There are plenty of charities that will give you free food if you ask.
I've never been this desperate before so I was unaware of that.
Next time you need something give me a call and I'll come help you.
I got all of Kendall's friends together the other night.
What for?
It was Kendall's birthday and we wanted to surprise her to celebrate.
Wow that must've been quite the celebration.
It really was!
You're a great friend Sydney.
Okay everybody. When she walks in the room yell surprise!
Okay but does she really not expect this?
She doesn't have a clue. So just follow the plan.
Kendall is going to be happy to see all of her friends. I can't wait to see her face.
I threw a surprise party for Kendall.
Wow how did it go?
It went great, she didn't expect a thing.
That's amazing I am glad the surprise worked.
I just hope Kendall enjoyed the celebration.
I am sure she did!
I'm planning on holding a get together for Kendall's birthday, are you in?
Is it a party?
Sort of, it's like a surprise party, don't tell Kendall about it.
Okay, I'm in.
I hung out with Robin today.
Nice, what'd you guys do?
Robin made me talk about the news.
Why?
They wanted to know what I think, I guess.
That's kind of weird.
I think Robin is not going to want to be friends with me anymore.
How come? You guys are so close.
Well she kept asking for my opinion about the recent events in the news. I didn't want to tell her the truth because I know we disagree on that.
Oh yeah, she's pretty left wing.
Exactly. So I kept trying to change the subject but she wouldn't give up.
Well hopefully she can be open minded and not let it affect your friendship.
I just knew Robin wouldn't agree with me, that's why I didn't want to say anything.
I didn't realize how far apart you two were in your opinions.
I didn't realize how invested Robin was in politics.
It's not a big surprise she has always been very into her news.
We just have completely different mindsets.
I think to remain friends, you two just have to stay out of politics.
I'm so glad I met Quinn! I was nervous about this new school after the move.
That's great do you two have a lot of the same interests?
I think so, she has invited me to her house tonight.
That's nice, at what time?
She said maybe for dinner? Her mom is making meatloaf!
That sounds great, have a good time!
Even though I was worried about moving to a new school, my first day turned out pretty great.
That's good to hear. Did you make new friends?
Actually, yes. This girl named Quinn seems really nice and she helped me a whole lot.
That's good. I'm glad to hear it. You should introduce us next time we hang out.
Today was my first day at school since we moved.
How was the new school, is the building like our school was?
No, it's all one big building, but it has a big playground and field and we got to run around for gym and recess.
That's way better then our small basketball court.
Yeah, and I met a girl named Quinn, she's my new friend.
Just don't forget your old friends, we miss you a lot.
I think I'm getting better at baseball.
Did you play today?
Yeah, I managed to get a hit at the game.
That's great, what will you work on now?
I still can become better at hitting.
If you work hard you'll be the best hitter.
O.K., I'm up to bat.
You can do it, Cameron.
This pitcher is pretty tough.
Nice, hit Cameron! Stay on second!
O.K. Now it's you're turn.
Don't worry, I'll drive you in.
My jaw hurts.
What happened? Did you fall or something?
I got hit by a pitch playing baseball the other day.
Maybe you should see a doctor and get it checked out.
I can't stand going to the doctor.
Better safe than sorry.
This bruise is pretty significant.
How did you get it?
I was playing baseball and got hit by the ball.
Wow, how fast was the ball traveling?
It was a fly ball, actually. The sun was in my eyes and I got hit after failing to catch it.
Looks like the baseball cap couldn't block the sun, huh?
I didn't see you at the baseball game.
Shoot, I forgot about that.
It was really fun. I finally got a hit in the game!
Wow, you are getting better. That is very cool!
Will you be at the next game?
I will try. See you soon!
I am so bored.
Well, stop staring out the window, and let's think of something to do.
What can we do in the rain?
Something inside, how about a movie?
Have you forgotten the movie theatres are closed?
No, just one of your DVDs.
I'm just staring out the window right now.
Why are you staring out the window?
I'm bored and I'm stuck inside of the house because it's raining.
Go play in the rain. It's refreshing.
Come over so I don't look like an idiot doing it alone.
I have a closet full of shoes, but I really want these so I bought them.
Well, you are not in need of money.
My dad pays for my credit card bills.
How nice it is to have a rich dad.
Not really. I never see him. He's always working.
Someone has to make the money.
I know I didn't need them but look at them.
They look expensive.
They were on sale, don't you think they are cute?
Yeah, they are fine I guess.
It felt great to be able to send lunch to my co-workers.
That's nice of you.
Yes and the people in the office were very grateful too.
I bet. Free lunch is always a good thing.
Free for everybody except the boss. I used the company card.
I wouldn't ask for any raises for a while.
Hey, I hope everyone enjoyed lunch
Yeah, thanks man! You didn't have to do that, though.
Hey, we're all in this together. Just trying to make the day a bit brighter.
Yeah, It's been pretty grim around here lately.
We all need to take a break and breathe once in a while. It's too serious around here.
Agreed. Let's finish lunch and hit the ground running.
I think everyone's too busy right now to get ourselves lunch.
I'd pickup food for you guys if I could, but I have to get this work done before noon.
How about I send out for lunch instead? They can drop it off here.
That's a great idea! Thanks so much.
You guys deserve it. The whole office has been working really hard today.
Ugh! How am I suppose to have my favourite cereal without milk. I hate this!
Well, you went shopping last night. Why didn't you buy milk?
I thought we had a whole gallon.
Oh, we used it for the cooking class. I thought you knew.
Well, you really should run out right now since dry cereal does not cut it for me.
Oh all right then. Give me ten minutes.
I had dry cereal for breakfast this morning.
That's an odd breakfast.
I had poured a bowl of cereal into my favourite bowl, but didn't know I was out of milk.
That's a shame.
Dude I just poured a nice bowl of cereal and we are out of milk. I thought there was some left
Nah man I used the last of it for dinner last night.
Well I'll make sure to add it to the grocery list.
You can always eat your cereal dry
I guess so it's just never as good
Agreed, but it'll still fill you up
The most annoying think happened this morning.
What is that? I hope it wasn't bad.
Well, it wasn't bad. Just about my cereal.
Oh no! Don't tell me the milk was spoiled.
Well, it wasn't spoiled, but we didn't have any.
Oh no! Well you could have just gone to the store I guess.
I was so exhausted. I couldn't even get my shoes off.
Long day at work?
Yeah. I'm just had to lie down on the bed.
Did anyone help you with your shoes?
Yes, Jordan removed them for me.
That was nice of him.
I am so tired today that I cannot wait to just get to bed.
Long day for you?
Yes, it has been a really long day.
I hear you, but sometimes sleep does the trick.
Yea, I collapsed right onto the bed earlier.
That's awesome! I hope that you are feeling better now.
I'm exhausted. I'm just going to collapse on the bed when I get home.
Why are you so exhausted?
It's been a very long day.
What happened?
The shipment was late, so we had to work overtime to unload it.
Don't forget to remove your shoes once you get into bed.
I was so tired yesterday I just collapsed on the bed.
Oh that stinks, did you fall asleep straight away?
Kind of, Jordan had to take my shoes off, I was so out of it.
That was very nice of him!
I know, I love him so much.
That's sweet, you two are great together.
I need a few extra hours.
What are you going to you do?
Well I was hoping to do extra work.
You should ask Austin if his driveway needs shovelling.
Ok that sounds good to be honest.
Good luck.
Do you still need some cash?
Yeah, I'm broke.
Austin is paying me $100 to shovel his driveway.
That's a lot of work.
If you help me, we can split the money.
I'll do it. I'm desperate.
I needed a few extra dollars to buy a video game.
Did you manage to get the money?
I did, by shovelling Austin's driveway.
Good for you.
I'm starting to feel really dizzy.
You should sit down. Just keep holding that on the wound.
How long do we have to wait?
I don't know. This seems like a pretty busy ER. Should be soon, though.
I hope so. Yeah, okay, I'd better sit down.
Just try and relax. I'll go and find out how long it's going to be.
Oh, man, this really hurts and it's pouring blood so fast!
You're going to be fine, buddy. Just hold that gauze over the hole and keep pressure on it!  We'll get you to the hospital in no time.
I kind of feel like I'm going to pass out, the pain is crazy.
I'm sorry, Quinn. I swear I didn't know it was loaded.
I know, it's okay.
Not long now Quinn.
I went to see an awful horror movie today. Now I won't sleep for a week.
Why did you go if it was awful?
A friend of mine asked me to go with her so I did. It was terrible.
Did your friend like it?
Oh, yes! She was totally into it. Screaming and hiding her eyes.
I love horror movies, so I figured I would just go.
But you don't even like that group of people, do you?
No, not really, but I had nothing else to do, and horror movies are my thing.
Was the movie at least a good movie?
The movie wasn't bad, I wouldn't see it again, but it gave me something to do.
Well next time, call me, we can go if you want.
I love being accurate.
Same.
I've got to get a closer look to figure out what that strange bird is.
Good idea.
I saw such a weird bird today.
Do you know what kind it was?
No, I tried to get closer, but it flew away.
That's too bad, I would have loved to see it.
My roommates are mad at me. I have been having farting due to flatulence in my stomach.
That is funny, did you have bad food?
I think my stomach hates the Italian food I had.
The pharmacist might be able to prescribe something for that.
I feel like the man who lives down the street should be avoided.
What gives you that sense?
I saw him yelling at some little kids the other day.
What kind of grown man thinks it's okay to yell at little kids?
Exactly. Seeing that made me judge his righteousness, and I think it'd be best to keep away from him.
You're probably smart to avoid him.
I finally proposed to my partner!
Congratulations! Haven't you been dating for a while now?
We've been dating for a year.
That's a good amount of time. How did you propose to them?
I did it in front of everyone!
I certainly hope they said yes!
My dad was a really bad guy. He never cared who he hurt.
That's terrible. I'm sure that makes you feel bad.
I used to feel really bad about it, but I've been doing everything I can to make things right.
You are a really caring person. Most people wouldn't bother with that.
I just felt like it was my duty to avenge all his wrongdoing.
You are really an inspiration for people who want to live a moral life.
I'm really glad that Addison was willing to support me on the decision I made for the family.
I think that's because Addison loves you.
I love her too. It was just sad that someone had to lose in the ordeal regardless.
As long as you guys stick together support each other, I think it'll be okay.
I'm glad to have a friend like you as well for support.
That's what we're here to do.
So do you really think we are doing the best thing? Moving across state is a big deal.
I think it will be a good thing. The work opportunity is once in a lifetime.
I know it is so hard to pass up.
Change is never easy but sometimes it's for the best, as long as Addison supports your decision.
Addison fully supports the families decision. I just hope it all works out.
You guys are a strong family, I'm sure it will.
I was so mad at my friend today.
What did your friend do to upset you?
Jimmy was messing around with my favourite toy dog and dropped it in the toilet.
How horrible!
Yeah I slapped him in the face. He felt ashamed about it and told me he would buy me a new one.
At least he's making it up to you.
You would not believe what happened to me today. Some guy came up behind me and started pinching my rear end.
Are you serious? What did you do? I would have screamed bloody murder.
I turned around and slapped him. I wasn't even thinking, it was just a reflex. I was so mad.
Lucky for him, you didn't have a knife in your hand. You might have stabbed him as a reflex.
You're probably right about that. In any case, the guy was drunk and apologized but I didn't accept it.
I ended up slapping that man in the face because he was being rude.
Oh wow, and then what did he do?
He looked like I just shot him and then ran off like a little kid.
I mean he deserved it, he was being a jerk to you for no reason.
I heard him say sorry as he was running off but I didn't care, he couldn't even look me in the eye and say it.
No one should ever talk to a woman the way he talked to you.
That guy just makes me so angry sometimes.
I know, he's such a jerk. Hopefully that slap will set him straight.
I think it will, he looked really apologetic after I smacked him.
Did you leave a mark at all?
No way, I didn't hit that hard. I wanted to avoid that. I didn't want to hurt the guy, just get the message across.
Well I think you made your point!
I had a very tense evening last night with my sons.
Oh no what happened how are you feeling?
I'm still upset about the situation but I'm much more calm now.
So tell me what happened with the kids?
The boys came in last night and were drunk and disrespectful to their father. I was so angry I slapped both of them for being disrespectful. I told them if they can't respect their father and the house they need to move out.
I know that had to be very hard for you. I think you need to give them two weeks to move out they aren't children anymore and you can't deal with the disrespect.
I was just over Ben's house again. I'm not sure if he likes me.
He has said repeatedly that he needs so breathing room. Don't suffocate him.
I know but I love being around him. He is so funny.
I am not sure if he feels the same way as you do about him.
Maybe I should stop seeing him so much.
Do you know if Sky is at the party?
I don't know if Sky decided to come.
Oh, do you know if she's at her sister's house.
I don't know but I know she likes to shop with her sister.
Do you think I can find her at the mall or the outlet stores?
Try the outlet stores. She loves outlets.
I turned Kendall into the police last night after I saw her stealing CDs from a car.
You did the right thing, she needs to understand how she acts is wrong.
She has been getting away with this for too long.
Her parents enable her behaviour because they are just like her.
Do you think she can ever change?
It is hard to say but she is not even 18 yet, so there is still hope.
I was sitting outside the other day and I saw this lady get inside a car and take some stuff and then run up the street!
Wow. Did you call the cops?
Yes and I gave them a description. They quickly found the lady and it turns out it was Kendall!
Wow Kendall? That is crazy. I never could imagine her stealing like that.
I didn't realize it was her at the time, but I was shocked too.
That's terrible. I wonder why she was stealing from someone!
I feel a little guilty for telling Kai not to come to the funeral.
Why would you keep your own brother from attending your dad's funeral?
Kai had a terrible relationship with our dad and doesn't deserve to come.
Your dad is dead, though, so it's about time your family tried to heal its broken relationships.
Maybe, but I can never forgive him for the shouting matches he had with our father.
Maybe Kai was too young at that point to understand why he was so angry.
Hey what's up friend?
Hey Remy, how are you? Nothing much going as usual.
I am good, I saw some people playing tennis at the park.
Okay, did you play with them?
Yes, they challenged us to a game.
Cool.
I met a few other tennis players today. Really nice folks.
How'd you meet them?
I was at the park and saw them playing tennis. I asked if I could get a game in with them.
Did you get to play?
Yes, one of the players was tired so she said she would sit this one out.
I played a game of tennis today with some people at the park!
Have you played before?
Not in a couple years, but I used to play all the time.
Did you have a good game with them?
I was very rusty but they taught me some new tricks.
That's so cool.
I wrote a good article about Riley's perspective, did you read it?
Yeah I thought it was particularly good.
Thank you, I take great pride in my work.
Do you intend on writing any more articles like this?
Yes I love writing articles about characters in books.
Well then I think you should make a career out of it.
I think Riley would be proud of me.
Riley would be angry.
Why would you say that?
You only knew Riley for a month!
We bonded so closely in that month!
I knew Riley for a year, so I knew her more!
Do you think the other movies will be as scary as the last one?
I hope so because I love scary movies.
Do you remember when we were young and used to stay up all night watching scary movies?
Best times of my life right there just living the dream.
I miss the old days and the older scary movies.
What kind of movie do you guys want to watch next?
We need something to make us laugh.
I got a couple options we can discuss.
I'm refilling up all our snacks so we can be ready.
Make sure to pop a lot of popcorn.
Working on that as we speak.
We were watching some scary movies last night, but we had to take a break.
Why would you need a break?
I was too scared to watch another one.
You could have just watched a comedy.
It was a Halloween movie marathon though.
Well, I guess funny movies were out of the question then.
How are you enjoying the Halloween movie marathon?
I'm ready for the next movie.
What kind of movie do you want to watch?
I like one with a lot of suspense.
I think that would perfect.
I'll see what movies there are in the collection.
I can't believe I decided to jump in front of that gunman.
You saved someone's life and the cops took the guy down because you did that.
I guess I will have a cool scar on my leg because of it.
Yeah always look on the bright side right!
In all seriousness I am glad no one got hurt.
Except the gunman, but he got what he deserved.
I can't believe I got shot. I'm lucky I didn't die!
You did end up in the hospital, but I'm glad you're okay.
The gunman wasn't firing at me, he was shooting at someone else. I jumped in front of the bullet to save them.
Yeah, you were a real hero.
I've been working really hard to get grants because I can't afford school on my own.
Keep it up. The hard work will pay off.
Hopefully it does. I'm trying to get a better grant for next school year.
Let me know if you need any letters of recommendation. I would gladly help you out.
Thanks so much.
It took me 20 minutes to double-check I had everything for the party today. I had to have everything I wanted to be sure of myself.
Did you have everything in the end?
No I still had to pick up one more thing so it's good I checked.
You seem really on top of the plans for this party.
I owe it to my husband to throw him a great 40th birthday party.
You're a really great wife to go to so much trouble.
I called the cop's yesterday on Casey's attacker.
Wait what! Go slow on this. What happened to Casey?
He was attacked by a person I know from our block. The man hit his face so hard that left Casey with bruises.
Damn! That's absurd.
Yes it is. I called the police on him and as we speak, he is in jail.
He deserves to be in prison. I am mad too.
What happened to Casey's face?
Someone hurt him and bruised his face.
It just fills me with anger and disgust that someone could do this to Casey.
It is awful.
These chips are so good.
You probably shouldn't eat too many.
They are just so good I cant stop eating them.
Your stomach is going to hurt.
You are right my stomach is upset, I feel a little nauseous right now.
Get some water, and stop eating all that salt.
I feel kind of sick right now. I ate too many chips.
Ahh. That would do it for sure. Limit yourself next time.
I always say I will but I never do.
I think we've all done that. Maybe it's better not to buy junk food to begin with.
Yeah, but I do it anyway and tell myself I'll just eat it over a longer period of time.
I hear you. But it's really easy to just eat it all at once.
I really feel nauseous.
What did you do?
I ate too many potato chips.
I didn't even know you bought potato chips for yourself.
I didn't. I ate your bag.
I'm glad you're feeling nauseous at the moment.
I walked so far today after work I am so sore.
Did you make it on time for work?
I only had fifteen minutes left and my manager still yelled at me.
Did you tell him that you couldn't find your work shoes?
I don't think he even really cared at all.
I had to work for an extra hour today.
Did you finally get some overtime work hours?
I wish. That was punishment for not arriving on time in the morning.
You are never tardy. What happened today?
I had to drop off my dog at the vet's in the morning.
I wish I didn't have to always use the bus because I never seem to be on time.
I wonder why your routes are always late, I don't have that problem.
I'm not sure! I waited an entire hour after work to get a ride home.
An hour! That is really extreme.
I was pretty frustrated, but for now my only other option is walking.
Maybe you should save up for your own vehicle.
Bailey let me manage the store. I think I did pretty well!
So you didn't have any problems?
No, not really. It was pretty busy, too.
Good work, I bet Bailey was pleased!
Thanks, I thought I did well!
Keep this up, and you'll be manager some day!
My car just broke down!
Oh no, where are you?
I'm in the middle of the road!
Do you want me to drive out and see if we can fix anything?
No, thank you, I have just called the auto club, they will tow me home.
Call me when you get home so I know you made it.
I had to call a tow truck today for the first time.
Your car broke down?
Yes in the middle of the road. I'm so glad I have triple A.
Did they come right away?
Pretty fast but I was so scared because it was blocking traffic.
I'm glad you and the car are home safe now.
My car broke down in the middle of the road. I called the auto club to help me tow it.
What's the matter with it?
I think they tell me there might be an engine issue.
Is it at the body shop still?
Yes, the mechanic will call me tomorrow with an estimate.
I hope it won't be too much.
I had a terrible day today. My stupid car broke down in the middle of the road. I couldn't even get it off the road.
Whoa, that could have been a disaster. What did you do?
I just stayed in the car and called the auto club. They came down in a half an hour and towed my car to my mechanic's shop.
You're lucky a car didn't hit you. Next time, I don't think you should stay in the car, in the middle of the road. Someone speeding could have hit you.
Yes, you're probably right but there was nothing on the side of the road.
Did you know that Sasha had never been swimming before?
Really not even in the ocean?
She'd never been in deeper water then her bath, so I taught her how to swim.
What did you teach her first?
First was how to hold her breath.
That's a good place to start.
I was teaching Sasha to swim.
How did that go?
Really well, it took a lot of practice but after a while she could hold her breath.
That's great progress..
Next I will teach her how to tread water.
Good luck with that.
I borrowed a book from the library.
Oh! For the research you told me about right?
Yes and it was really helpful.
Okay, so you were able to find the necessary details you needed?
Yes I was.
This is a really interesting book and I think that all the stories will be used immensely for it.
There are lots of other people that have the same interest as you but no drive.
Yeah you're right. I am just so relieved to find something I can research and have a lot of passion for.
It has been such a fun time in regards to learning more about your interests.
I cant wait to share more of this information with all my friends.
I know righ.t
Sorry If I seem to be busy. I just came back from the library.
Did you get anything interesting?
Yeah, I got this book on old ruins in South America.
Is it for any type of homework for school?
No. It's just a subject I like doing research for.
That's what makes me and you different. I would never do extra work if I didn't have to.
I borrowed a book from the library.
Relax man, the research is relaxed.
I know but I want to get a good grade in the class.
I know but you have six classes to take.
You need to get audio books too.
That's good for you.
Oh hey Matt how's it going?
Great, how are you? What are you doing here?
I need a book for a research project for school. Trying to decide the topic.
Cool, always a fun time at the library.
Hey, you can always learn something here.
Are you ready to play the new Halo game with me?
Yes, when did you get it?
Yesterday, my dad took me to the store to buy it.
You've been saving all month for it.
I have, I even worked overtime bus boy shifts at the restaurant to make sure I had enough money for it.
I am sure you are glad to finally have it to play.
I finally bought it!
What did you buy?
That game I told you about. I finally saved up and got it.
How did you save all that money?
I worked a lot of overtime hours and finally got the money to get it.
That's awesome I'm really happy for you!
I'm so excited! This has been a great day.
Looks like you are in good spirits today.
I am. I've been working too much lately and it has finally paid off.
It definitely feels nice to get rewarded. I'm so happy for you.
With the extra money I saved up I managed to buy a game that I've always been looking forward to playing.
Working so hard at a goal and succeeded, you've done well friend.
Hey, look at what I bought!
Woah! Dude, that game is so expensive.
I have been working so much overtime, finally got paid. So worth it.
Totally! Let's take advantage of that.
Meet me at my house to play?
On my way!
I worked so hard, I finally got my overtime pay check
Did you buy the game you wanted?
Yes I'm going to play it on Friday
Is it multiplayer?
Yeah want to join me?
I'd love to!
I love my work.
You spend a lot of time there.
I have devoted time to the study of animals, many hours of my personal time in fact.
You are constantly in the lab.
Every week, I would go out for hours on end to watch them in their own habitat if I had that chance.
You might be able to switch from lab work to field work.
Next week I am finally going to Arizona to study the creatures of the desert.
Its so exciting that you keep getting to go out into the wilderness and study all these animals.
I love it, I love being out in the wilderness, in their habitats and watching them for hours do what they do.
I should have thought about that for my PHD, instead I sit in a lab day in and day out.
I couldn't do that, I want to be out in nature where I can study animals and devote my time to being in their environment and living in their world.
You are so lucky, what a wonderful way to spend your time.
I went to a great flick.
What did you see?
I saw JoJo Rabbit.
That film almost won an Academy Award.
I told my brother about the movie as I was excited to share how entertaining it was.
That was very kind of you.
I had to help Taylor out on buying clothes today.
She came into your store?
Yes and bought the wrong size! I had her try it on and made her do it so she could be sure.
Yeah, you really need to try some items on before buying.
At least it was a good way to work, helping a friend.
True. It must be nice to see your friends at the store.
I'm meeting Taylor for coffee later.
Are the two of you just meeting for a catch-up?
No, she's treating me since she bought the wrong size clothes from my boutique, and I let her come back to the shop for new clothes.
That was kind of you since I know you have a no-return and no-exchange policy.
I'll bend the rules a bit for friends.
I'm sure that Taylor was appreciative.
Taylor bought the wrong size of clothes!
Did they come back for the right sizes?
They did! they came back to the shop and I gave them the right one.
You did great.
I've been working all week on these costumes.
The ones for the Anime contest?
Yeah, my fingers are cut up from sewing.
Thanks for all the hard work, you didn't have to do this much.
I really want us to win, so I had to work hard.
I really think his costume is going to win me the contest
It really does look amazing I'm very hopeful that you will win
Thank you I put in a lot of time and effort into it
I understand I think it will pay off for you
Me too it would mean a lot to me to win
I have my fingers crossed for you
I really hope I win the contest tonight since many Hollywood scouts will be there
You put so much effort into it, I'd would be surprised if you didn't
I think I spent about forty hours in total working on it
I am sure you will win the contest.
I am so hungry!
Why not go to the fridge and eat something?
I checked in Addison's fridge, there is nothing there.
You should go shopping.
I will once I get some money.
Here, I'll loan you 7 dollars.
I was waiting for Addison to finish up today at his house and he had no food.
Did you need something to eat?
I wanted a snack so I checked the fridge and it was totally empty.
What does she eat if there's nothing there?
I guess she orders in a lot.
You'll have to bring some snacks over next time you go.
I opened up Addison's fridge to grab a beer and some grub, but there's nothing in there to drink or eat.
You mean it's completely empty.
Well, maybe not completely.  There was an old shrivelled up carrot rolling around.
That's sad.  Does Addison have enough money for food?
Not for food, Addison spends it all on bills and rent.
Sounds like he needs to move out of his house to a cheaper place.
I spent all day at Addison's with no food.
Surely they must have had something?
Nope, everything was empty, including the fridge.
Man, that really sucks.
Plus I couldn't get anything delivered because she lives in the middle of nowhere.
At least next time you know to bring something with you.
I am hungry.
You haven't eaten recently?
No. I was over at Addison's house but he didn't have any food in the fridge.
He never has any food in the house.
I was so frightened, I was genuinely shaking.
Yeah, that was a scary accident for Aubrey.
She could have died. I literally have been shaken up all day.
Yeah it was really a close call. The car that side swiped her was massive.
I am just thankful that she's okay.
Hopefully in a couple days you can give her a hospital visit.
When I got that call last month that Aubrey had been in an accident, my heart stopped beating.
I can only imagine because I know how close you and Aubrey are.
It was so scary to know that she had been hurt and then the wondering if she was going to pull through. It was so hard.
I am so glad that she ended up pulling through.
You have no idea. I cannot imagine living without her in my life.
I am sure she is glad to have you as well.
I heard Tracy was feeling under the weather.
She had a bad case of the flu.
I made her some soup and the put her to bed, it was wholesome.
Aren't you sweet.
I'm sure that she would do the same for me.
You would hope so!
Tracy had the flu so bad. I came over to look after him.
That was sweet of you.
I know! I fed him some soup.
Did you manage to have fun anyway?
No, I put him to bed to get some rest and watched TV until I had to go back home.
Let's hope you don't get the flu now.
I've been taking care of my daughter Tracy for the last couple of hours.
Did something happen? Is she sick?
Indeed, it's a bad case of the flu. Symptoms were a fever and a persistent cough.
I know from experience how unpleasant the flu can be.
I fed my daughter some soup and bread, gave some her some paracetamol then laid her down in bed to get some rest.
The best way to recover from the flu is to rest and take in some electrolytes. Gatorade can help with that.
I made a strange hand to chest gesture the other day.
Were you pledging allegiance to the flag?
No, but I was promising Sasha something and wanted to relay I was serious.
So a patriotic gesture just came about from pure instinct.
Yeah, habits from school, I guess.
Did Sasha believe you?
Right, so you know when people make pinkie promises?
I think so, yeah.
I've got my own version of that, just to be sure I place my hand in someone's chest to let them know I'm not going to betray them.
Ok that's weird but if it makes you feel better, I can't fault you.
It's a serious promise pact, I did it with Sasha earlier today.
Hope she wasn't freaked out.
I've been studying this case all week long.
You're the best lawyer I know, so you should be able to make something out of it.
I'm trying to put together a defence for my client, so I have to study both the case and the law as it applies to the case.
Your client's lucky to have you.
I can't believe I started blushing in class.
I could see it from the other side of the room. Your face looked like a tomato. What happened?
The teacher called me out for failing the test.
That's really mean of her!
I had the most embarrassing thing happen today.
I'm sorry to hear that, what happened?
I failed the math test and the teacher told the whole class.
That's a mean thing to do, how did you react?
I stayed silent but felt so shameful that my whole face turned as red as a lobster.
I hope you turn this experience into a positive and study more for the next test.
I feel like nothing I say ever gets taken seriously.
Why, what happened? Something at work again?
Yeah. My boss keeps telling me I am doing something wrong when I know I'm not! She keeps telling me what to do when the work is supposed to be subjective!
Ah, well I guess it would be wise to just listen to her from now on. Don't waste your breath and put your job on the line. It's not worth it.
I know. I'm just exhausted from it all so I'm letting it go now. I'm just going to do what she wants me to do and turn in boring, mediocre work.
That's my girl!
Oh my goodness, I am so wiped out from writing a story.
You wrote a story?
Well it's actually our essay exam for the semester grade.
Yikes! that's a lot of work for you. I know you don't like school.
I just don't like to do homework but I managed to finish it so I should pass.
Good for you. You should be proud for trying.
I am glad she told us it was the test.
Yeah, I haven't studied very much.
Well the essay is the test, so that is easy to do.
I guess it's better than a quiz.
I can write an essay better than I can study.
Well it will work out for all of us.
Kendall is going to kill me!
What did you do this time?
I was gambling at a poker game and lost all of her money!
You should find a way to get her money back.
I will.
Well I was at the casino the other night and I may have lost some money.
May have? How much money did you lose?
Look I had a great hand in this poker game, 3 aces, and it was a sure thing.
Except it wasn't Jan, how much money did you lose exactly?
About 5 grand, but the worst part is that I borrowed it from Kendall, I don't know how to tell her.
You borrowed it from Kendall? How could you do that Jan? You better tell her or I will.
I lost all of Kendall's hard earned money at a game of poker.
When did you do that?
A couple of days ago when we went to the casino.
You can't win every time.
I was up over a thousand then I lost it all.
That's how it goes.
Man, Tracy is such a character.
She likes doing tricks and playing games.
Too right, I was on my lunch break and she just snuck up out of nowhere.
Why on earth would she do that?
She was trying to scare me for fun, shame that I spilt a coffee over my expensive new white trousers.
I would have killed her if I were you.
Is it me or is Tracy really strange?
She does have some weird mannerism I must admit.
Well, yesterday she snuck up behind me and screamed in my ear. Could've given me a heart attack.
That's one way to express humour, I guess.
How did you like my performance for Remy's wedding?
It was beautiful and I'm glad he hired you.
I sung every song on that list of his favourite songs.
He looked incredibly happy, I'm sure he loved it.
Just give me a great referral.
I will definitely drum you up some more business.
Always nice to perform at ceremonies, good spirits all round.
Did you sing your usual stuff or a requested playlist.
No, Remy wanted all of his favourite songs played, so I fulfilled his wishes.
Your musical knowledge and style must be so versatile to deal with that.
It's what having a lot of years in the industry does to you.
What did you think about the set of songs I sang at the ceremony?
I thought you did a great job. Who picked the songs?
Remy did. It was a list of her favourite songs.
It turned out to be a really nice set and she looked beautiful.
Remy requested me for the ceremony!
Was it fun at the event?
Yes, I sang Remy's favourite song
She must really be happy!
Yes! she danced a lot
The ceremony was quite beautiful. You should have seen it.
I'll bet it was lovely. Did Remy like the songs you sang?
Of course, why wouldn't she? She requested them all personally.
Oh. At least you knew you'd be a hit, right?
Right. Plus we have similar taste in music, so I really did like her choices.
And you sing so beautifully, you could make anything sound good.
I am really happy today
Why is that?
I got to see some friends I had not seen in a really long time!
That is great, what did you do?
We played baseball like old times
How fun! I'm happy for you guys
I missed those guys. It's been a long time.
About time you had a chance to meet your friends. You never have time to play baseball anymore.
Between work and college I barely have time to breathe, let alone play sports.
How long is your break for?
I'm on holiday break for two weeks, but I still have to work. Maybe two days a week I can get together with them again.
That sucks, look after yourself.
I had such a great time. It was good to finally get to hang out again with my friends.
I know, it had been way too long!
Yeah, I've got to do this more often with them. I love playing baseball.
Shame you don't get to play it as much, you could have made it pro for sure.
Well, let's not exaggerate now.
I'm serious!
I miss my friends.
Haven't you kept in touch?
I finally called them up so we played baseball, but I won't see them again for ages.
Did your team win?
Yeah, we thrashed them!
I'll come next time and show you what it's all about.
This is great, I finally had some time to meet and play baseball with my pals.
How long has it been?
At least, a month.  I'm glad we got everyone together.
You guys go so long without seeing each other, I couldn't do it.
It's just the way it is after college you see, people don't have as much time.
That's sad.
I feel like I want to travel to Spain to immerse myself in their language and culture.
You are in an advanced Spanish course, I think it would be fun.
Yeah, it would be expensive though.
You can always pay it off through a credit card.
Yeah, but anyway I want you to go with me if I decide to go.
Seriously? I would love to go with you!
I took a six month Spanish class online.
You should be fluent in Spanish now.
I've been practicing words and the accent a lot.
You should try it out and start a conversation with people who are fluent in Spanish.
I've decided, I want to go out of the country to a location where Spanish is the main language to try out my skills.
Great, I'll go too.
So you know how I've been taking those Spanish classes at the community college?
Yes, aren't you on level 4 now?
Yes, and I feel like I've learned all I can in the class.
Well that is exciting.
Sort of.  I can't go any further so I booked a trip to Mexico to practice in real life!
Even more exciting!  I hope you have fun!!
Hey how was your morning?
It was ok, same thing just another morning.
Yeah I just got back from the supermarket to get some fruit for my smoothie. I do that every morning
Why don't you just buy enough fruit to last you a couple of days?
Because I enjoy going to the supermarket. It gives me something to do
If it was me I would just buy enough fruit for the week.
My friends came to me for help.
What kind of help?
They had a problem and I gave them some hope.
What did you do?
I offered them a couple of options to consider for the solution.
I hope they took your advice.
I think a have a few options people should look at before we start the meeting
I hope you can figure this out before your manager sees it
I think I can shed some light on what has been going on with the stocks
You need to figure it out fast, or you might get fired
I think I have a few good solutions
I hope Carson can understand why I couldn6't go out with him
I'm sure he will, because you haven't seen your other friends for a long time
Things just haven't been the same since the hurricane, I had to relocate
Must be tough, you haven't had a chance to really meet with anyone
You will tonight though!
I have been thinking all day of my plans for the weekend.
Exactly what are your plans?
I didn't want to disappoint Carson, but I told him I was going out with my friends instead.
How did he take it?
It was no problem. He just wants me happy.
You are so lucky to have him.
Me and my friend were gone for a really long time.
Where did you guys go?
We just went to the bathroom. But people were getting worried that we wouldn't return.
Why did you guys take so long?
The line for the bathroom was incredibly long, so we just had to patiently wait.
I hate when bathroom lines are long, especially when I really have to go!
I hope no one worries that I will be gone for awhile and won't come back
I'm sure they understand that you needed to get checked out
My body temperature has been so bad. It's been rising steadily
It's better to get checked out than to have someone get really sick
Yeah, that's a good idea. I will come back as soon as possible.
I just got back from the mall.
We were worried about you.
Yeah, sorry, my phone was off.
We were about to call the police. We thought that you might not return.
Oh, you should not worry so much.
You two mean everything to us!
I swear to God, I'm dealing with incompetency.
Rough day at work?
We had a big case to cover today and my associates forgot the briefcase.
Oh no, how did you get through trial?
I had to rush back, drive all the way around town and get the briefcase.
At least you got it there in time.
How can someone forget the paperwork for the trial!
Your associates must have their heads in the clouds.
I suppose I can sort of sympathise. Having the stress of a trial on your shoulders is not easy.
I know...nerves I guess. It's not everyday you take on such a famous figure.
Yeah, we caught him red handed committing fraud .
I feel confident he'll go away for fraud for a very long time.
I was running on the way to lecture and dropped my laptop!
Oh no. Can you get it repaired?
Yes but it'll cost a lot. I dropped it on a corner and the screen cracked.
Can you use it and just get a new part or what?
No, I had to leave it at the computer place.
I know that place and it's good. They'll fix it fast and I bet it'll be better than new.
I am so upset.  I dropped my laptop on my way to Biology today.
Did it break?
It did.  It doesn't start now and there's a dent on the body.
Are you going to fix it?
I am going to take it back to the store and get it repaired.  I won't have a computer until it's fixed.
You can borrow mine until you get it back.
On my way home last night I saw a stray cat on the side of the road, so I took it home with me.
Aw, are you going to keep it permanently?
I think so. I'm already growing attached to it.
Do you have any other pets?
I do have a cat, but so far they seem to be getting along.
That's good. Now your cat will have a friend.
I have the craziest story.  You know how I always drive down Columbia Street to get home?
Yes, I know that street.
Well, I saw that there was a stray cat by the side of the road.
Did you stop to see if it was ok?
Yeah, and it jumped right in the car.  I decided to keep it!
Congratulations on your new pet!
Damn it.
What?
I really like their clothes, but to buy the same clothes I need a job and to make some cash.
Yeah, nice things cost money.
Yup, I'm going to make it one day though.
I really want to get a nice business suit, like the ones they are wearing.
Well, go shopping and buy one.
I don't have the money.
Well, go get a job.
I don't have a suit to wear to the interview.
Perhaps you can make money writing a novel.
They always have the coolest clothes. Can you take me shopping sometime so I can try find the same ones?
Sure! You want to buy the same kind of clothes?
I do. They look expensive, though. Are they?
A little expensive, but they're good quality and well made.
I'd better get a job and start making some money.
Definitely. And then you'll have cool clothes to wear to your new job!
The guys across the hall for me always have the best clothes.
I have seen those guys. They're pretty stylish.
I wanted to be able to dress more like that but couldn't afford those clothes.
I think he goes to those shops downtown.
Well I have a job now. I can go to those shops downtown too.
And then you'll be the cool stylish one.
I am celebrating my birthday on Saturday.
What is your plan?
I would like to invite all my friends to join me.
Am I invited as well?
Of course you are.
I will wait to hear from you then.
I'm having the birthday party on Saturday. I hope all my friends can come.
How many people have you invited?
Including you, there's 20.
Wow, that's going to be a big group. Do you want me to bring anything?
You could bring a bottle of wine if you want.
Sounds good. I'll see you Saturday.
What a day!
What happened?
I got a flat tire while driving.
Flat tires are the worst!
I pulled over and saw my front right tire was flat.
Who did you call for help?
Got a flat tire earlier today.
Oh no that stinks, what did you do?
I just pulled over to look at it. It looked flat but not all the way.
What happened, did you have to call a tow truck or something?
Yeah, I did. But he took so long and in the meantime somebody came to help me and changed it himself! I was so happy.
That's cool.
I freaked out because I got a flat tire while driving over here.
Oh my God. Did you change it yourself?
Yeah. I pulled over to check it out.
Thank God you were able to pull over in time.
Yeah. My rims are ok, and I had the jack and spare tire.
Well just know that you can call me if you ever need me to help in a situation like that.
I had to give them all money for lunch, cost a me a fortune!
You're so generous.
I would hate to starve so I did what I had to.
I suppose they did put you in awkward situation, you can't really say no otherwise you're the bad guy.
Yeah, that's what sucks about it.
Next time say you forgot your wallet.
I am going broke with buying lunch for them, but they are happy.
That's what matters most.
I know but if I pack lunch for them then I can save a ton.
But then you waste it since they don't eat it and its gets dumped.
You're right. I guess its easier just to buy lunch anyway.
Love and happiness always has a price attached to it.
The cafeteria is good and everything, but I don't understand why they hype it up so much.
I like to eat in the cafeteria too, to be honest.
Well, I had to give them money as well, all for substandard food.
You can't say no when someone asks you a favour, can you?.
Sadly, no.
You'll be broke in no time.
I was so busy this morning, I forgot to pack the kids lunch.
Did you just give them some money.
Yeah, the like to buy lunch from the cafeteria anyway, they don't like the healthy ones that I make.
They are happy to have a change of something different.
I don't like being around people if I'm not 100%.
Explain what you mean.
I wasn't feeling good so I told the people throwing the party I can't make it.
It's better to rest when you are sick.
Exactly man.
I'm sorry to do this, but I'm going to have to opt out of the party.
I'm sorry to hear that. Did you let the hosts know?
I'm actually not feeling so well. I think I might have the flu. I've let them know, so they know that I won't be attending
I'd rather you take care of yourself than get everyone at the party sick, so I understand why you don't want to attend. I hope you feel better!
I'd better not come tonight.
Why what's going on?
I don't feel very well, and with the flu going around it's probably best if I stay home.
Oh no, I'm so sorry! Thanks for doing the right thing though. I'm sure the hosts will be understanding. Are you going to get tested?
Well I'm going to wait a couple of days and see if I feel better or worse. But for now I'm just going to hunker down here.
That's a good idea. I hope you don't have it! But if you do, at least you know you're good after that!
I knew Addison stole my doll and I knew right where it was.
He was talking about it last week, actually.
I cant believe he would resort to stealing my favourite doll from me
Just don't invite him into your house anymore I guess
It was my doll in Addison's room and that is why I took it! Why did he even have it in the first place?
It's such a cute doll, but Addison had no right to take it from you like that.
I swear the guy must be a kleptomaniac.
Just be a bit more wary of him from now on.
Yeah, sure will be.
Do you mind if I play with your doll for a bit?
I think having Taylor acting as my agent really helped get me a better business deal.
Taylor does have some business experience.
He also seems to have some acting experience as well. Taylor was really believable as my agent.
That's great that the business deal turned out great.
It did. I'm going to give him a gift to show my gratitude.
Sounds fair as a payment for your agent.
Me and Casey used a new technique today to help her with drawing practice.
Oh cool, is it that method you've been telling me about?
Absolutely, I used her hand and made it follow a certain direction across the paper.
I will take all the tips and tricks you have, if it works on Casey.
It worked with my other pupils so it should be good with you too.
Casey is going to become a pro in no time.
I was teaching Casey how to draw last night.
She is getting better with drawing the faces.
I have been taking her hand and guiding it across the paper, to show her how I do it.
You have such patience with her, most people would not take the time
Casey has a lot to learn, but today we took a step in the right direction.
Are you trying to improve her drawing?
Indeed, I used this technique I saw online where you guide their hand across the paper.
Yeah, that sounds like a good idea.
Especially as we're practicing shapes at the moment, it will really help her.
You're a great coach.
I had my first drawing class today and met the sweetest person, Casey.
Oh, did you teach her anything valuable?
I used her hand to draw on the paper, so that she could get a feel of how it's done.
I've never heard of that but sounds fun.
It's genuinely the best way to learn if you're using pencils.
Maybe I'll give it a go as well at some point.
I ran out of ideas to teach Casey, until it struck me that I could quite literally guide her hand whilst drawing.
Yes, that way you can get the picture to look the way she wants it.
So you start by taking the hand and sketching out the base of your drawing, then you fill it in using colours.
That's interesting, how did it turn out for her?
It made a massive difference, compared to when I left her on her own.
Fancy showing me as well?
I fell asleep last night, I was exhausted.  I couldn't wake up this morning.
Were you late for work?
I was. I forgot to set my alarm and I was too tired to wake up on my own.
Did you go to work?
I called in and my colleagues I was running late.  They seem cool.
That's good they are understanding.
Oh no, I am so fired. I need to jump in the shower and get to work!!
Well, hurry up. I can drop you off.
I knew not to hang around so long with you.
Those shots did us in.
Not only that. It was the stupid video games too.
Well, if you get fired then we can do more shots and finish our game.
I hate my neighbours' dog. It doesn't ever stop barking.  It barks all day and night.
How do you get any sleep?
I don't.  It keeps me up most nights.
What are you going to do about that?
I went to the shop and bought some poisonous slug pellets. I gave the dog some of the pills.
You poisoned the dog?
I feel really bad right now.
Why, what happened?
My neighbor’s dog has been barking nonstop all day and night so I...did something about it.
What? What did you do???
I bought some poisonous slug pellets and gave the dog some pills.
Wow, way to go. You killed a dog for barking. You must be real proud of yourself.
I dont know how this dog is going to stop barking
yeah he for sure is making a lot of unwanted noise.  It is a true inconvience for many
there has got to be some way to make him stop
What ideas do you have?
I think I will give him a pet friendly sedative
That is a really good idea
I have not sleep in days!! I have had it with that dog so I took matters into my own hands.
What the hell did you do, Sash?
I have been warning my neighbor about leaving their stupid dog in the yard all night. It barks and barks and barks.
What a bunch of dumb-asses! Did you call the cops?
I call the cops, animal control and friends of pets but it was useless. So I handled it with my little friend over here.
Sash, that is so mean. You should use it on the neighbors not the dog!!
I will try hard to keep the memory of my parents alive.
Nice, it's saddened they died with the war.
Yeah, I planned to keep the memory fresh.
And did you?
Yeah, for it to be remembered, I did justice.
That's Nice, you are so brave.
The statue turned out just perfect.
Your parents would be proud of you, that you have kept their memory alive and what they did to get you out of the country.
They died to save me.
You were everything to them.
I know, I hope that this reminds others of the sacrifices that many in the war made.
I created an memorial for my parents to savour their memories.
That's sweet of you. What made you do it?
I thought my parents deserved better memories than those cluttered with war.
That's good. I wouldn't want my parents memories to be clouded with thoughts of war either.
I helped a baby today and I was proud of myself.
What happened? Tell me more.
I pulled a baby away from the road when a car was about to hit the baby.
Really? That's some hero stuff there man.
Yeah, it was a good act and the kid was very adorable.
Sure, I'm also proud of you my friend.
Last night a baby almost got hit by a car.
What happened?
We were walking to the store and this car came out of nowhere and was about to hit her.
Good thing she had you to pull her out of the road, so she didn't get hit.
I pulled that girl up right before she could get hit.
I had a scare today, my baby almost got hit by a car!
Oh my God! Is he ok? Please tell me he's ok!
Yes, it's fine. You know how fast babies can wander, he was out on the front lawn with me, and he got right to the street before I knew it.
And you grabbed him just before he got hit?
Yes, it was a pretty close call. The car wouldn't have seen him due to the trees near the street.
I'm just glad your baby is ok, that's a very scary situation.
Oh my god, dude, I just saved a baby.
What, like in a video game?
No, dude, this baby was in the middle of the road and about to be hit by a car.
What happened?
I had to run out and grab it, it was just before the car would've hit it. I'm trying to find its parents, now.
Wow, you're a hero. Let me know if I can help!
My theory worked.
You tested it?
Yes, after years of being mocked by my colleagues, I've proved them wrong.
I'm so proud of you.  You never gave up.
It took years, but I finally did it.
We need to go out and celebrate.
I believe in the scientific method.
Your colleagues don't believe in it.
Some of my colleagues have mocked me for years.
Have you gotten the better of them?
I developed and tested a theory and I proved it.
You can't argue with the scientific method.
Those fools, short-sighted colleagues of mine. For years they laughed at me, well who's laughing now!
I always believed in your theories, I knew you could do it.
This should prove everything they doubted about me.
How did you manage to get this done considering you were on your own?
Pure genius, my friend.
And self belief I guess.
I can't do that hike with you tomorrow.
How come?
I have a big track meet next week and have to save my legs, I'm going to take it easy.
You're not going to work out until then?
Oh, sure, but hard hiking uses your muscles differently.
I didn't know that.
I have a big track meet next week.
Did you train well?
I trained well. But, I've been taking it easy over the past week.
Why didn't you train hard over the past week?
I want my muscles to relax. I don't want a muscle strain to occur right before the track meet.
I understand. Take it easy.
I have been skipping track practice all week.
Why have you been skipping practice, don't you need it?
I am the star on my team. I'm resting so I can be in good shape at our next meet.
Shouldn't you be practicing for the next meet if it's important?
I want to save my strength. I'm just taking it easy.
You know what they say. Practice makes perfect.
I think this dress will fit Jesse after I fix the waist.
Let her try it on real quick to know how it feels.
I'm not giving it back until it's perfect.
That's some good work ethic, but it's already looking amazing.
Looks more comfortable too.
I'm finally coming to the finish line with this wedding dress.
So you're putting on the final touches now?
Yes as I did the fitting yesterday. Should be good for Jesse.
How did that go?
I had to make a few adjustments but nothing else.
I can't wait to see her in the final product on her wedding day.
It looks like Jesse lost weight for her wedding. I'll take the dress in a little here.
The dress is beautiful. I still can't believe she's getting married.
Yeah. Just a week away! I hope she doesn't lose any more weight.
The ceremony and all the plans, only for the dress not to fit. That would be heart-breaking.
Well the dress will be ready and beautiful and everything will be perfect.
I hope so!
I had to give very detailed directions to my friend
Was the place very far?
No, it's that it was off the main roads so it was hard to find.
Oh, glad they found the cabin though.
It is pretty simple, my friend just had to follow the directions.
Why didn't you take her there? She could have gone missing.
I just didn't have time, plus it's a bit of an adventure to go off the main roads.
Where is she going again?
To a cabin in the woods, for holiday.
Exciting.
I told my friend that we would have to depend on the landscape to find the cabin.
I still don't understand why there isn't a map to it.
Because all my family knows where it is by heart. It's just off the main road.
There is a lot of forest there to drive around. You should have helped her out.
Don't make me feel guilty.
I'm not! I'm just saying she might get lost.
The cabin is off the main road, I don't know what was so hard for my friend to understand.
Did she get there alright?
Yeah, but I had to sit there for a good forty minutes explaining how to get there and what roads to avoid.
Are you going as well?
I will meet her there once I get this assignment done.
I see.
I am grateful that I didn't need to be rescued out there.
Didn't you see the storm warnings before going out?
I did. I just wanted to be out on the water and feel the wind. It was stupid.
Girl, we could be reading about you in the papers today. I'm glad you didn't need to be rescued too.
I will never do anything that stupid again.
Good. You live and you learn.
It was so exciting to go through all the winds and such.
I heard it is pretty dangerous, did you not listen to the warnings?
It most definitely was, but I live on the edge of danger
I know, you're crazy.
I'm going to ride into the storm again for sure.
Kendall is a backstabbing liar.
What are you doing back in here?
So, she said I was leaving today and then she threw me back into prison after lunch.
Where did she go?
In her office, to file work.
I'm going to have to make this brief because the prison times your phone calls.
The prison? Are you calling me from prison?
Yeah, I was hoping you could post my bail. Kendall threw me in here last night for drunk driving. She's gone back to the office so I can't even persuade her.
You were drinking and driving?
No, Kendall's just out to get me. The bail amount is $500. Can you post it?
Okay, fine. Just this once!
I've been working on taking care of Jesse for the last couple days.
That's good to hear you doing things for others.
Jesse came down with an illness. At first it didn't seem too serious but the symptoms persisted after 3 days.
A couple of days is about when I would get worried myself.
I decided to take her to the doctor and it turned out she had a fever of 104 degrees.
Wow, that seems really high. It's a good thing you took action when you did.
I have been so worried about Jesse. I am so glad she finally agreed to come with me to the doctor.
I don't know why you have to bring her there, it's only a small cold.
It's been days that she's ill, I was left with no choice.
Sometimes you just need a good old rest, not a doctor.
At least we now know that it is not anything serious.
Yeah, still Jesse is very lucky to have someone as caring as you.
I nearly died last night.
I'm glad you're alive. What happened?
I had a heart attack. I was rushed me to hospital.
Thank God someone was around!
Yes. I had someone also sat by my bed the whole night.
Are you feeling better now?
Did you enjoy the food for the reception party after the wedding?
Sure! I ate a whole lot of it.
Oh good, I prepared the food.
Wow! you are such a great cook
Thanks!
I prepared all of the food for the reception after her wedding.
I think you found a new line of work.
Everyone said the food was the best they ever had. Really shocked I haven't gotten calls to cater anything else.
You need to market your business. Facebook or any other means of doing so.
You're right. I need to put it out there!
Use her as a reference if you get calls. Maybe some of the guests will give you references on how the food tastes.
I was one of the people who prepared food for the reception party after the wedding.
What kind of food did you prepare?
Several types of finger food.
Were they difficult to make?
I made all the reception food for the wedding, not to brag or anything.
It was really good. Especially that crab dip.
I'm glad you liked it. I made it especially for the groom who loves the stuff.
Everyone was talking about how good the food was . Now I can tell them to thank you for it.
This student wrote a 12 page paper when I only asked for a 3 page minimum.
That is way too long. Are you going to give the student extra credit for writing so much?
It's an ok paper, but repetitive. However , he did go above and beyond. I guess I will give him some extra points for extra work.
That is nice of you. I'm sure he will be happy to hear see that .
I was dealing with this one student today who I kind of felt bad for.
Why did you feel badly for them?
Well I was looking at their paper and it was really a terrible paper.
So did they not follow instructions?
No it was not even that, they followed instructions and made it very long. I feel like I should make the grade at least a B.
That makes sense to me.
I've been grading papers for the last couple of days. This one paper put in extra effort, I can tell.  It was much better than the rest.
It was a stand out.
There's always one of those.
The person deserves bonus points.
We are not awarding bonus points on this paper.
The person should get a star at least.  I used to get those from my elementary teachers when I was younger.
I was so disappointed when I had got there, all the items I wanted were gone.
Not even the coffee table you really wanted?
Nope, and it looks like the faucets I wanted aren't on sale anymore either.
Unfortunately that's the way it goes with sales, you have to act fast.
That's too bad. Do you know if there will be a sale again?
I don't know, but look out for black Friday because that's happening soon!
I just came from the home improvement store.
What did you get?
Just a few things that I wanted to buy.
At least they were in stock.
Yeah, but they were no longer on sale like they were the week before.
That's why I like to buy things on sale even when I don't need it.
The stuff I was looking for in the sale isn't available anymore.
You should've just bought it on Amazon.
I don't know, they don't have the exact same stuff.
That's where I buy everything.
I am so confused about Quinn, but then we sat down and had a coffee and it was all sorted.
He's a very ambiguous person, you just have to get on his level.
I understand. I felt like I got to know him on a different level after today.
You two are going to be best friends.
Looks like it, we might have a good bond.
Good for you.
You know how I used to think Quinn was odd?
Oh yeah I remember you mentioned him to me.
Well I got to know him better last weekend
Cool how was he?
He was more normal than I thought now that I talked to him, he is fine.
That's great, must feel good to know that now.
I am just getting to know Quinn.
Quinn can be mysterious.
There is some ambiguity about Quinn and I wanted to know more about her.
What did you do?
I felt more informed when I got to know her better.
Better decisions are based on more information.
I once lent Robin some money.
That was nice of you to help him.
Yes, but I need him to pay me back.
Of course, that is understandable.
That is the reason why I went to his job.
I hope he paid you there.
I know it was uncalled for, but I showed up at Robin's work to get what she owed me.
That must have been so embarrassing for her.
It was the only way to get her attention, by the looks of it.
Well did you get what you wanted?
Kind of.
Good.
I can't figure out what's wrong with Robin
Why do you say that?
He owes me money but it's like he does not want to pay me back
But I thought he earns well.
That's why I went to see him at his work place to demand for my money
I hope you got what belongs to you
Robin still owes me money, but I'm confident she'll be able to pay me back.
What makes you say that, since she still hasn't paid you anything?
I got to see Robin at work. She's really good at what she does and she'll be able to earn enough to pay me back in no time.
It's always a bad idea to loan friends money, in my opinion.
I hope Robin pays me back the money she owes me today
Just go visit her at work and ask her
I already went and had a chat, she said to wait until next week.
Sounds to me like you're letting her walk all over you.
No it's nothing like that, I trust her.
I called Aubrey's girlfriend to check up on the condition Aubrey is in after her accident.
What accident?
Aubrey was involved in a really bad car accident.  She completely wrecked her car and two other cars involved in the accident.
That's horrifying.  How's she doing?
I am not sure. I think she's in the hospital.
How many days has it been?
I can't believe Aubrey had that car accident, I couldn't even get through to her.
Oh my god, did you manage to speak to a relative?
I only spoke to her girlfriend, she says she's fine but needs time to recover.
How long before she's out of hospital then?
Should be at least a month.
Let me know once she's feeling better.
Did you hear that Aubrey was in a car accident last week?
No I didn't, is he okay?
Well, I called Aubrey's girlfriend to check up on him. She said he was doing a little better but still in a lot of pain.
That's awful, did he end up breaking any bones?
She said he has a broken leg and is in a cast for a few weeks.
Well, I hope he gets well soon and makes a speedy recovery!
Oh boy am I tired.
Why are you so tired?
I was cleaning out the garage all day, and I did not realize the amount of stuff in there
Doing some spring cleaning?
Kind of, we're doing a garage sale for my church tomorrow, so I'm deciding what I should get rid of
What a great idea, killing two birds with one stone
I've cleaned up the garage, ready for the weekend.
Are you having the sale this weekend?
That's the plan!
Can I help you sell stuff?
it's a lot of work, there's a huge mess to sort through
I'm capable enough
I had to help cleaning out the garage today.
For chores?
No, my family is participating in the block garage sale.
Oh I love garage sales. When is it?
This weekend. So we had to finish the clean-up by today.
I might come and do some shopping!
I had a garage sale today.
How did it go?
We made some sales, but the hardest part was cleaning out the garage to make it happen.
It's hard to make sales when you're surrounded by junk.
Very true. I threw away more stuff than I sold.
No one wanted to buy your garbage?
Aubrey still chats with me every day.
Is this your friend from another state?
Yeah, I'm still in her daily thoughts even though I moved across the country five years ago.
Are you more like family than like friends?
Yes, I don't even keep in touch with my parents that closely.
You guys must have a special bond.
I'm really missing Aubrey these days.
I thought you haven't talked to her in years.
I haven't, not since I moved away twenty years ago.
So what's making you think of her now?
She sent me an email saying she thinks of me almost every day.
That's so sweet of her.
I talked to Aubrey yesterday, and she was very sad that we moved.
You can call and email her to stay in contact.
I have been in contact with her lately.
How does she feel about your move?
She says that she thinks about me everyday.
I hope that you stay in contact with her.
I was on the highway and it struck me that I had almost no gas left in the tank.
Did you make it through?
Just about, thankfully the next station was 3 miles away.
Close call.
Plus this pick up truck goes through gas like manic.
That's the thing about big cars.
I was driving home the other night and I realized my gas light was on.
Did you manage to get gas before you ran out?
Yes, fortunately I was only a couple of miles away from a gas station. But I think I was running on fumes by the time I got there.
Good thing you didn't run out of gas somewhere and get stuck.
Yeah, but I really need to pay more attention to my gas gauge and not risk running out.
Oh wow, it's crazy how low the fuel was in the car and yet I still managed to make it to the house.
It has been a hell of a day.
It really has. I was  going run out of fuel right on the road but there was a cannister in the house.
And you trusted that?
I had no choice.
I suppose.
I just checked the fuel gauge, and the car's almost out of gas.
There's a gas station just up the road.
Great--I'll stop there...
You want me to get you something inside while you fill the tank?
Get me a coke.  I'm just about done.
I'll be right out.
That roller coaster at the fair was so scary.
It looked really dangerous, you rode it?
Yeah, it was shaking the whole time.
I would never ride a fair roller coaster, they're built in a day.
I didn't know that.
Now you know they're dangerous.
I realised I was in danger when I rode the fair's roller coaster!
I dislike roller coasters!
I was so scared, it felt so jittery as well!
I got scared too, it was the first and last time I'll ever go.
Hey I just rode the rollercoaster at the fair and it was scary.
Yea man, its a fair you should know the dangers
Yea but it's a coaster it looks so much fun to ride.
Yea but you take your own risk riding any rides at a fair
God saved me today.
What's up?
I rolled a roller coaster at the fair, I wasn't good at riding it, they should know they were in danger.
Oh jheeze, that was dangerous.
Yeah, I just wanted to give it a try.
Don't give unnecessary try next time.
It is about time that Robin reached my level.
What do you mean? Robin has always been better than you in this game.
Yeah right, she doesn't have any idea of how long it took her.
You're just jealous because she's now at the same level as you.
You need to get your facts right.
I am so proud of Robin this week!
Why? What did she do?
It took her a long time, but she has finally reached the same level as me at work!
No way, I know how hard you both were working trying to get her to the next level.
Yes, exactly, hard work does pay off!
That it does my friend, that is does.
I don't take for granted how skilled I am.
You are a pretty humble person, Tracy.
It took a lot of years to master mathematics.
I imagine it's very tough. Robin is highly skilled in math as well.
Yes, I would say he's finally reached my level after several years.
I'm sure it was extremely difficult for him to do that.
Bailey was so excited when I told her about the management opening at our company.
Hasn't she been looking for a good job for a long time?
Yes, and I think she will be perfect for the position in our office.
I am sure she really appreciated you helping her get the job.
We have been friends since elementary school so I was happy I could do it.
You are truly a loyal friend!
I didn't want to believe what was happening. I wanted to stay in denial.
What couldn't you believe?
I didn't want to accept my diagnosis, Sydney had to convince me.
What were you diagnosed with?
I have a rare medical condition.
How's it going?
I'm doing okay, but I am somewhat concerned about what Sydney said.
Why all the worry? I can't help this.
Yeah but are you ok with everything?
I finally better just accept things so I can move forward, thanks to Sydney's comments.
I'll be here for you no matter what.
I finally asked Sasha out on a date! We're going to dinner this weekend.
I thought you were going to stay away from relationships and focus on your work.
I was going to, but I really like Sasha.
If she agreed to go out to dinner with you, she must like you too.
I really like this girl Sasha and I finally asked her out on a date.
That's awesome. Where are you going?
I'm taking her out to dinner on Friday.
Very nice. Dinner always makes a good first date.
I agree. Easy for conversation, but also natural little breaks to eat.
Exactly. You'll have to let me know how it goes.
I need a lawyer and bail money.
That sounds really bad.
I learned Cameron was trying to have an affair with my husband.
Did you revert to violence?
I tried to kill him.
It can't get any more violent than that.
I led Aubrey and her team up the mountain yesterday.
Did it go well?
Yes, there were some very experienced climbers, so it went quickly.
That's good, I remember that one group you brought up who had three injuries.
Yes, that was a terrible group to lead!
You should have minimum skill requirements to go up that mountain.
We had a great time hiking the mountain over the weekend.
Aubrey told me she had a blast.
Yeah, I was the guide for her team and helped them find the best route up and down.
That's good to hear. Aubrey told me she felt safe knowing you were leading everybody.
I'm glad they had confidence in me.
You'll never believe who I led up the mountain last weekend?
I'm not sure I could guess, but it must be someone I know.  Who?
Aubrey!  She was there were a group of college friends.
Wow, I haven't seen her in ages.  How is she?
She's great, really enjoying college life.  She and her friends really enjoyed the hike, too.
That's all great to hear.  Let me know if you see her again.
I am going to bring a spinach dish for the potluck.
I hate spinach.
It's so good for you though.  It's packed with vitamins.
I've heard all that from my mom and doctor.  They are both trying to get me to eat more vegetables.
Add me to that list.  You need to eat more vegetables.  You eat nothing but hotdogs and buns and ketchup.
Ketchup counts as a vegetable, right?  It's made from tomatoes.
I found a necklace at the park.
Do you know who it belongs to?
Yes. It is Aubrey's. She complained to me that she lost her necklace at the park.
Then you found it. That is so nice of you
Thanks by the way
Now go get Aubrey.
Aubrey lost her necklace.
She lost it at the park.
I will help her find it.
Hopefully yes. Tell her we will go there.
I called the police to help.
I found it, Bailey!
I was a hero today.
Did you save someone’s life?
I sort of did that.
It’s either you did or you didn’t.
Aubrey lost her mom’s necklace and I helped her find it.
So if she didn’t find it she was going to die, is that what you’re saying?
Bob won the game. I had told him I would take him out for drinks so that's what we did.
What game?
He played football in college. Their team won.
What position does he play?
He's the quarterback.
Wasn't he the quarterback in high school too?
Did I tell you I lost my game last night?
What was the final score?
4-3 and I had a bet with Bob that I would buy him a drink if he won.
I am sure he made you honour that bet.
It worked out because we stopped at the bar around the corner and they had late night drink specials.
Next time you're there give me a call and I'll join you.
Well, I guess I lost that bet with Bob. Teaches me not to get in these situations.
I still can't believe that he won, it was such a close game and his team won by a last minute winner.
The bet was so much fun, I'm mad I lost but we laughed it off over a drink I owed him in the end.
Good stuff.
I went for a drink with Bob the other night.
Really? That's not like you.
I know! But I promised to take him for a drink if we won.
You and your promises.
Yes, and I held up my end of the deal.
Now THAT sounds like you.
You should have seen her! She fell and started rolling around down the mountain.
Were you not worried?
I couldn't help it. It was kind of funny. But then I went over to check Sydney was actually alright.
Did you manage to make it to the top of the mountain?
Yeah, she was in pain after the trip but then it was all good..
Congratulations.
I think Sydney is mad at me.
Why would she be mad at you?
She fell down and I laughed at her, whilst on that hike I told you about.
I'd be mad if you laughed at me too.
It was really funny though.
It probably wasn't funny to her.
Sydney got so mad at me and called me immature.
Why did she call you immature?
Well she was hiking and tripped while going up the trail and I started laughing.
Why did you laugh did you at least help her when she tripped?
Yes, I did but it was knee jerk reaction and I couldn't help but laugh.
I hope she wasn't hurt after she tripped while hiking.
I think that I really impressed Skylar's parents last night at dinner.
Yeah, I think you did Jesse. They seemed really impressed when they spoke about you.
I am so glad that they approve of my job as an engineer.  I can provide well for Skylar.
I think so too. But it's not just about the money.
They also liked that I could speak 2 other languages and that I'm very outgoing.
Only time will tell, but they seemed happy with you.
Skylar took me over to meet her parents last week.
What were they like?
They are really nice. We all had dinner together and talked about what we all do for a living.
Do you think you made a good impression?
I feel like I did. They kept telling Skylar she had found a good catch.
That is great news. I am glad it is working out for you guys.
Bro, I was freaking terrified going to Skylar's parents' house.
How terrified? Like seen a ghost terrified or didn't study for an exam terrified?
Honestly, a combo of both, but I'd humbly like to say I aced it thanks to my scheme!
What did you do?
I told them I was an astronaut in training and I could fly an air force 1 jet.
You only left out the Microsoft flight simulator part, that's smart.
Do you like my new red car? It may have some dents in it but it is a beast.
Yes I love sports cars.  Did you get a discount because of all of the dents?
I got it for a fair price from a friend. No worries there.  Do you want to go for a spin?
Hell yeah Casey.  Let's go.  Show me what she's got.
The car I bought has some dents in it.
Who did you get it from?
I got it from a friend of mine.
What colour is it?
Red
Well it should be okay with the dents.
I just got something new.
What did you get?
A  red car that I bought from a friend but it has some dents in it.
Congrats on the new car.
Thanks, I'll be driving around the block.
I finally have a working car!
Oh nice.  Where'd you get it?
My friend was selling it.  It runs well.
What's it look like?
It's red.  It's nice with only a few small dents.
Now I'll be able to meet you at the mall instead of having to pick you up.
I sped the whole way here.
Why would you do that?
It was emotional. I was angry while driving.
What made you so mad?
Someone cut me off and almost caused a crash.
So your response was to continue the cycle of recklessness?
I was so frustrated and filled with rage at that other driver!
What happened?
He cut me off and gave me an obscene gesture with his middle finger.
That’s aweful! Some people are cruel and unkind.
Yes, so I sped up and cut him off to teach him a lesson.
That could have been dangerous Austin.
The doors open in five minutes. I have everything set up around me. Breads on one table and sweets and cakes on another.
You have plenty but I know you will sell out.
You are so kind. There will be lots of other vendors here selling cakes and breads.
Yeah but they aren't your cakes and breads, Addison.
Well I just want to sell out and make a bit of profit.
You will. You always do. You are becoming famous around here for your breads and cakes.
I am so excited for this years bake sale!
So am I, have you set up already?
I have the tables ready for the cakes and sweets.
Sounds great! You have it all worked out by the sound of it.
Thanks, I will separate the breads from the cakes and the sweets so people don't get confused.
I can't wait for this amazing bake sale.
What are we going to put out for it?
Well, one table with the breads and another with sweets and cakes.
That sounds amazing. I know exactly which spot I will go to.
You might have to fight me for that one.
Oh yeah? I think that I will win that one.
Did you like my article where I went over Riley's perspective in the movie?
Yeah I thought it was a great read actually.
I put a lot of effort into it because I want to be picked up by a major publication for my writing.
I think you are already good enough, you just have to keep writing.
Thanks, and I already have several other articles lined up for this week.
That is a lot, I hope they do well when you post them.
I think that you may not be seeing the underlying theme here.
I feel like as I read the passage the woman was in a state of happiness.
Sure she was happy but also confused.
I suppose when she made her choice that meant she may regret it later.
That is right, because of Riley's perspective she will never know what would have happened. I gave a thorough analysis of this.
That may always leave a feeling of what if.
I ended up winning the race!
I know, you were amazing on the track!
I thought I was going to run into that one guy, I had to make sure I didn’t.
You came pretty close, I saw you move over a little
I really wanted to win the race last weekend, but I was extra careful not to run into anybody.
Didn't you have a problem with that in a recent race, where you ran into someone and you both fell?
Yup, that's why I was so careful this time.  I keep a good distance and when I wanted to pass I swung wide.
So, how did it go?
I came in second.  But at least I didn't run into anyone.
Well, congratulations on second place.  That's still an accomplishment.
I was trying to win the race, but I'm so clumsy that I have to ensure I don’t run into anyone first!
That must give you a disadvantage surely?
Yeah, but at least I'm preventing a concussion.
Better safe than sorry and all that.
Exactly.
So did you win in the end?
I was almost at the finish line.  I could see it so close to me
Yeah you were really close.
There were so many people at that marathon I had to make sure I wasn’t running into anyone first.
Of course I totally understand your concern.
Sucks that I didn't finish because of that but at least I tried.
Better luck next time.
Does it look like I will need stitches?
It is going to be a close call, we will have to wait for the bleeding to slow down so  I can see the cut.
Have you ever rode down a hill that was so steep before?
No, I have never even seen a hill that was that steep and long before. You've got to be careful Kendall.
Well, we will know from first hand experience to not do that hill again.
That is for sure, I am just sorry it took you losing control of your bike for us to know.
I was riding my bike down a really steep hill, and I lost control of my bike.
Oh, I'm so sorry. I hope you didn't get hurt to badly.
I have a bunch of scrapes and bruises, but thankfully nothing worse than that.
That's good. It could have been a lot worse.
Definitely. As I was losing control, I was really scared of what was going to happen.
That had to be really scary. I'm glad you're alright.
Lee had too much energy last night.
What was he doing?
Running around and jumping.
Did he fall asleep eventually?
Yeah, but not from being tired, I told him a story.
At least you know how to put him to bed.
Lee didn't want to sleep last night, so I told him a story.
Let me guess, it was the one about the counting sheep!
How'd you figure that one out? Yeah, it is an oldie but a goodie. Puts them right to sleep.
Any story about numbered sheep jumping over a fence would put an insomniac into slumber, Jesse.
Yeah, that's true. I would do it in my own head to put me to sleep.
I've done it before, too. I usually get around to the 10th sheep and then I'm out.
I have the hardest time getting Lee to sleep.
That is a common problem.
The boy finds excuses to stay awake.
What seems to work?
I get Lee into a comfortable position in the bed and start to tell him the most boring story I can think of until he nods off.
Whatever gets you through the night.
You need to pick me up around the corner.
I'm at the front. Why are you around the corner?
I stole money from the bank and I ran for my life when I saw a police officer inside.
Nope. I'm not picking you up. I'm not picking up a bank robber.
What? I'll be arrested.
As you should.
I had a really good plan, though. I thought for sure I would make it happen.
But robbing a bank? That's a terrible idea.
It turned out to be. There was a police officer inside!
What?! What happened? You obviously didn't get arrested...
I had to run for my life! I ran out of there so fast and hid in someone's doghouse.
That was one of your worst ideas ever, don't be robbing banks anymore.
I'm scared to death right now.
Why is that? What happened?
Don't tell anyone, but I tried to rob a bank.
That is serious stuff man.
Yes, especially since a police officer was inside.
No way that is bad news man.
This club is so awesome, and I can't believe I never even knew it was here!
Me either, I thought you would have come to this place all the time, cause you love dancing so much!
I do love to dance!  And there are so many hot guys here!  And hot girls, too!
There sure are!  Let's ditch those two dorks we came with and find some real guys to party with!
Let's do that!  And tonight there's not going to be any leaving early, we're not walking out that door until after the sun comes up!
It's a deal.  We're going to go to only the best raves in the city from now on!
So what did you do last night?
Not much, I just stayed in and watched movies. What did you do?
Well l went to that new nightclub that had opened up last week.
That sounds like fun, how was it?
It was so amazing, and I literally stayed the entire night dancing with Susie and Kelly.
I am so jealous. I totally wish I were there too.
Hanging out with all of my friends at the nightclub is so much fun.
It's been a great night so far.
I really needed this kind of weekend after the work week I've had.
We need to do that more often.
Definitely. For now, let's just dance.
Good timing. My song is on right now.
This was definitely a fun weekend for me.
I'm glad you enjoyed it. Tell me about your experiences.
I went to a busy nightclub with a close group of friends and spent the entire night there.
That must have been really fun and exciting.
It was. I danced with my friends and we stayed up all night. There was hours of fun that night.
That's good to hear. I spent some time with my family this weekend.
I was out last night and I didn't see you at the club.
Oh, I was out at a bar instead with some friends.
The nightclub was crazy and I was with all of our college friends til way late into the morning.
That sounds like so much fun dancing all night!
I danced with them all and I wanted to stay all night long.
That's so cool and maybe next time we can kick it for the weekend.
I finally called Lee and asked for a meeting.
I'm glad you two are finally going to talk.
I need to get the record straight with him. I'm tired of all the rumours and bull.
I'm sure he is too.
Yeah, he must be because he was ready to talk.
I'm meeting with Lee soon to set the record straight.
Did Lee misunderstand something?
Yeah, he's been giving other people a different account of things all week long and I need to tell him what really happened so he stops spreading misinformation.
Good luck! I hate it when people gossip about things they don't fully understand.
Did Kendall tell you about our trip to the haunted house on Saturday?
Yes, she said you were pretty spooked!
I really was! I am glad she held me close because I would have curled up and cried without her.
Was it that bad? That's hilarious!
I am not very good with scary things but apparently Kendall is!
Well you agreed to go in so can't blame her!
Kendall was really scared at that haunted house. She was really holding me close.
She probably felt like you were protecting her.
Nope! I was scared too!
Oh. Sounds like you guys were huddling.
Yeah. That was a scary place!
That's cool. You've got to tell me where it is. I could use a good scare right now.
I killed a bunch of bugs today.
It's so weird that you do that. Why do you want to kill them?
I think they're gross and I hate them. I especially hate bees, spiders, worms and ants.
You should be careful around those insects even if you hate them. Bees and spiders can be dangerous.
I dreamt I started world Peace.
How? Maybe we can actually do it.
I was a super power leader encouraging peaceful discourse among enemies.
Sounds vague.
It was vague in the dream too. Nothing actionable.
Oh well. I guess world Peace waits until you have a specific dream.
I had a dream!
Can you share your dream with me?
I had a dream that I solved the worlds problem by encouraging peaceful discourse as a leader of the country!
Your dreams can come through, you know!
I hope they do.
Working with that debate coach really paid off. I was ready for every argument that my opponent made.
A debate coach seems kind of silly. Don't you just have to anticipate what your opponent will say?
Well we both have to anticipate what the other will say.
So what's so hard about that?
Having a response ready is key. Being concise and articulate are important.
So I guess having a coach is important and worked out for you.
I'm so glad I read the reviews about that new restaurant.
Did you end up going?
Yes, I had dinner there last night with my boyfriend.
How was the food there?
I really enjoyed my meal! I can't wait to go back there again.
That sounds really good, I can't wait to try it out too.
We did it.  We totalled their vehicle.
Haha.  Yeah and they thought we were joking!
We had to teach them a lesson somehow!
It was a brilliant plan.
Yes. Indeed.  Thanks for the help.
No problem.  I had fun!
What a great game! I think that's the best I've ever played.
I think so too. You were on fire out there. Did you hear me cheering?
I sure did. I like how you had the whole section joining in.
They did that voluntarily. You were the star of the show today!
I hope you were filming me when I scored the winning goal.
Don't worry, I got it. We'll be able to make a nice highlight reel with all of your exploits.
We were in overtime, I got the ball, and saw Joe open in the corner.
So you passed it to him?
No, I took the shot. Everyone thought I'd pass so they moved towards Joe.
When everyone thinks one thing, better to go with the other.
I just started to play soccer.
That is not an easy game.
In my very first game I shot the ball by the goaltender and straight into the goal.
That is amazing.
Even better, my goal was the winning one as we beat them one to nothing.
I think that was more than beginner's luck.
You won't believe what happened, Kai passed out in class and i caught his head with my jacket before it hit the desk.
That is awful, why did he pass out?
The paramedics who came said he was very dehydrated.
It is a good thing you were there otherwise he might have hurt himself.
Yeah those desks are really hard and he would have had a huge cut on his head.
I would have not reacted as quickly as you that is for sure.
I had so much fun.
let's go swim next week too.
Yea I'm down to do that too.
My schedule is open.
I'll open my calendar up.
See you there.
Lets spend the day going down to the swimming pool
that sounds like a great idea to me
I always have such a great time splashing around at the beach and getting everyone wet
I used to remember you splashing us when we were kids
Some of my friends and I went swimming at the Beast Swimming Pool.
Did you play games in the pool?
We played with the beach ball.
Who won the game?
We didn't play a competitive game. We just splashed around with the ball in the pool.
I'm sure you had a great time with your friends.
I love the beach and today it was a great reminder.
Did you end up going swimming with everyone?
At first I wasn't, but then the water call my name.
I wish I could've went with you guys.
We are doing it again next weekend if a lot of people don't have to work.
I know I'm off, so that's one.
I loved hanging out at the pool, had the time of my life!
Sounds like you had more fun than you can handle.
No way! I can always handle hanging out at the pool with the coolest friends around.
Wish that I could take time off from work and join you guys at the pool.
It's ok, you can join us on the weekend.
Great, sounds like a plan!
I have been quite sick and it's been a week now, doctor.
No problem, can you stuck your tongue out for me.
Sure, I can do that since I'm here.
Okay, it does seem like you have the flu based on what I can tell.
Oh, yeah that makes sense the way I have been feeling.
Take some of this medicine and get some rest for the week now.
Have you ever heard of any diseases being discovered from a doctor looking at your tongue?
Umm, that is a weird and random question.
I was just at the doctor, and he made me stick out my tongue to check for some kind of disease or maybe diseases.
Maybe that is just routine now a days, who knows with all the diseases and viruses that are going around.
Maybe you are right, I just never had that happen to me before.
I never had either, maybe it'll happen to me once I go to the doctors next.
I gave my class a test.
Was the test difficult?
To do well required a full hour.
How did your class perform?
I gave them time to finish before we moved on to the next section.
They can't say you are not fair.
I am still waiting to move on to the next section.
How come you are waiting so long?
Well, I wanted the class to finish the test first before moving on to the next section.
Well that seems like the right thing to do, to make sure everyone is on the same page.
Yeah, as soon as I know the class comprehended this section is the best time to move on.
I like that way of thinking.
I'm going to give you extra ten minutes.
that's to finish the test.
it's a long learning curve.
A very complex subject right.
yea, they need to focus.
it's algebra duh.
My class was taking a test today that was in several sections
Did they all start each section at different times?
No, I tried to give everyone time to finish the first test so they could all start the next section at the same time
Oh, how did that work out?
I think the class appreciated not being stressed by seeing other students moving on before them.
You are a great teacher!
Carson gave me some great ideas for my book report.
How did he know what to say?
He's a real book lover and he knew  the book I was writing about.
Wow. that was lucky for you.
It was a big help. I just needed an idea and it all seemed to work for a whole report.
Good luck. I hope you get a great grade on it.
It is so hard to write a book report.
It's not that hard.
I have trouble coming up with ideas.
I can help you.
I already stole Carson's idea.
That is ridiculous!
I literally could not figure out something innovative to help me with my goal of bringing in more customers.
Sometimes it's best to go back to the basics. What made your business something that people liked to begin with?
That's what I kept coming back to. I went back to the beginning and put a new spin on it.
Did it work? When I was in your shop yesterday, it was crowded.
It definitely worked. I'm already thinking about how to expand upon it.
Sometimes simple is better. People tend to overthink things.
My mom had so much mail that she had not sent out.
You went to the post office on Monday, It is so busy during that time.
I just ended up forwarding all the mail.
That is easier than standing in that line, with a mask on. You don't even have to leave home.
Hey how are you doing?
I am drowning in mail we are so busy!
I did see a lot of cars outside the post office when I pulled up.
I believe it because it is chaos in here today.
Is there anything I can do to help?
Yes could you forward this stack of mail for me?
Hey how are you?
I'm alright, how are you? Did you manage to send the mail?
The post office was very busy today, but don't you  worry!
You know that letter has to be posted by Tuesday.
I am well aware of that, that is why I forwarded the letter for you.
Thank you very much, I don't know what I would do without you.
I got to bring my nephew to church this weekend while i was babysitting him!
Was it hard having her there?
Not really. He behaved really well for the most part.
That's really good. Kids don't always behave that well at church.
He slept some of the time, so then he was pretty content after that.
I'm glad it went well for you!!
I really wanted to give this child some foundation in religion.
Did the child's parents mind you doing that?
It was my brother's kid. So I just did it without asking.
Wow, that sounds risky. Some people get awkward about religion.
I just want the child to have the same Christian upbringing that I had.
Well good luck with your brother. He might be mad at you for awhile.
So happy I finally sold my car. I was lucky to sell it over the Kelley Blue Book value.
Most people never make over that. You are lucky. What are you doing with the money?
I'm going to buy a new car.
What kind of car are you looking for?
Something good for the environment. Maybe a Prius.
Good for you! I love my Prius.
I'm going to use money from the sale.
What sale?
I have placed my car on the market and happy with the profit it turned out.
What are you going to buy?
A sedan probably.
awesome!
Did you hear the news? I found a buyer for my old car!
Wow, that's great to hear. Was it on the market for long?
Not at all. I found a buyer the same week.
I'm happy for you! What will you drive now?
I'm going to the auto lot today to find a new car to buy with my profits.
Awesome, I'll come too!
I had an amazing time last night dancing with a mysterious woman.
Wow that sounds amazing how did you meet.
She struck up a conversation with me and I could feel instant chemistry.
That sounds so romantic.
I asked her to dance and it was a magical moment we danced the tango.  It was a seductive and very climatic movement everyone on the dance floor stared at us.
My goodness did you ask her out on a date?
i had a magical moment tonight
what happened?
i was dancing with someone and it just felt really moving.
did you know this person?
kind of.
that does sound pretty nice.
I just put the muffins in the oven, so they should be ready to eat in about 20 minutes.
That's great. Did you remember to set the timer?
Whoops! I completely forgot.
This is why you keep burning things, Jordan.
I burned the muffins to a crisp.
I thought that you set the timer, before you put them in the oven.
I was busy with kids, and just forgot to turn it on, and then the doorbell rang.
We all forget to set the timer, I would not beat yourself up to bad.
I forgot to set the timer when I was trying to make a muffins today.
That is horrible. Did you remember to take them out in time?
I did not. I simply put them in the oven and waited to hear a timer that never went off.
When did you eventually remember to take them out?
When they were dried out and it was too late.
Well, I guess you try again tomorrow.
I was so worried that I had missed my chance!
Missed your chance at what?
Auditioning for a part in the school play! I really want to be in it!
Oh yah, that is not until Friday! Today is only Tuesday silly!
I know, but I guess I just got my days of the week confused!
Looks like it! You are good!
There was this play at the local play house that I really wanted to be in but I thought I missed the audition.
Did it turn out you hadn't missed it?
I didn't. And I was so relieved I just felt so much better. Auditions are next week, I thought they were last month.
You were off by a month.
I knew it was the 20th. I just thought June 20th.
Well at least you figured it out before July 21st.
I am going to audition for the play. I just found out it's not too late.
Cool! I hope you get the part.
Yeah, the character I want to play is one of my favourites
Then I am sure you will get the part.
I got myself into serious trouble with that stupid fight.
You mean the fight you had with Carol after school last week?
Yeah, I think I'm getting expelled. They're going to send a letter to my parents.
That's really bad news, Bailey. What will your parents do?
I'll probably be grounded for eternity!
Maybe if your parents have a conference with the principal you can stay in school.
I went to see my doctor yesterday.
What was the reason?
I took my pills to the doctor, so they can see what kind of medication I was taking.
Oh I see. Is everything ok?
Everything is fine.
Good to hear.
When I heard the loud noise, I turned around with everyone and saw the car crash.
Where was this?
It was on the highway out of town.  It was horrible.  Multiple cars slammed into each other.
Hope people weren't terribly hurt.
I heard about it later on the radio.  Two teenagers died in the crash.  They weren't wearing their seatbelts.
That's tragic.
I feel really shaky right now because I saw a car crash earlier.
Oh, no! Is everybody okay?
I don't know. I just heard a loud noise, turned my head and then saw two cars collide with each other.
I heard the freeway was blocked off earlier today, so that must be the reason. I hope nobody died.
Oh my goodness, I heard the screeching and it was so loud.
Yes, that car could not put on the brakes fast enough.
Then I turned and boom, the car just rolled into the intersection and crashed into the truck.
It was very scary and the noise was devastating to hear.
I ran over there to try to see how I could help.
The police have been called and they are on the way.
Austin decorated my house for the party.  He did me a big favour.
How nice of him.
I was just too busy working late every night so he offered to help me.
What was the party for?
It's my roommate's birthday and I wanted to throw her a party and invite her friends.
Birthday parties are the best of times.
Austin is a good guy.
Why you say that?
He did me a favour and decorated the house for the party.
A man decorated for you. Wow that is special.
I'm so happy that you remembered the party
i would never forget it and i was waiting to decorate your house right after you left
so that's why you were acting weird all day
guilty as charged i guess
I could not get people to come to supper.
You must have gotten tired of yelling.
We bought a bell.
That would work.
Now when I start to ring the dinner bell people are alerted that it is time to eat.
That was a clever purchase.
I had to ring the bell so everyone knew dinner was done
oh that's how you inform them when foods ready ?
yea i usually just ring the bell a few times
oh so people then know it's dinner time
yes
that's a great idea you have there.
I finished cooking and rang the bell for everyone to eat.
Oh, what did you cook?
I made burgers and fries today.
Wow, that sounds good!
You can come and get some if you want.
I might because I'm pretty hungry right now!
Everyone it's time to eat
I heard that dinner Bell going
Yep I had to ring it so you guys could come down and eat
I'll be down there in a few after I finish up this paper
How long is a few?
Probably like 10 to 15 minutes.
Can I get ice cream from grocery store?
Sure, however you need to finish the chicken first!
Ugh I'm so tired of protein.
You also you need to finish the veggies.
I will.
I'll do it and you can do it.
I wish I lived at your house!
Why do you want to live at my house, Casey?
I wanted a ice cream cone and my momma made me eat my chicken dinner first.
My momma does the same thing. You have to eat healthy meal before you have a treat she always says.
Poop on that. It should be the other way around.
My parents wouldn't make me have some ice cream.
Man. Why are they being like that?
They wanted me to eat their crappy dinner.
I get it. You should've just ate the dinner.
I want an ice cream cone now!
You can have one once you finish you dinner.
That's not fair. I hate the taste of chicken.
Well, just eat it. Once you do, you can have your treat.
No fair!
Beggars can't be choosers girl!
It was like walking through a long desert and you finally find water.
Are you happy with the way the team played?
I think our team finally played the way I knew they could.
Do you think you can win next week?
If we play like we did today then we have a good chance.
Well good luck next week and I hope you get another win.
As soon as I confirmed the reservation, I thanked them for the help and then wrapped it up.
Did they understand why it took so long?
They did, I just had to explain to them the situation at the front of the house.
I'm glad everything went well!
Whew. I can't believe I almost took out a deer.
Your mom would have rung your neck if you crashed her Jag.
I think so but she would be more worried about us.
Maybe but she puts this stupid Jag ahead of everything in life.
That's not fair. Just because she's been sleeping in the Jag instead of with dad does mean she cares more about a car.
Dude, I was not suppose to know that. TMI.
I'm always trying to think of the best chess move that I can make.
Yea, It's tough to make the right move all of the time.
Yea, but I usually find a way to win.
That's great! I see the move you are taking.
Yea, I like to take the offensive move quickly.
I see! Whatever helps you to win I guess.
I made sure my ex husband's family would never take my cash.
What did you do?
I had someone steal their money.
How did stealing their money help?
Now they aren't so focused on me!
Sounds like a smart plan!
I have a few moves in the game so I played the offensive and attacked the opponents before they attacked me.
That's a great strategy.
It helped me win the game.   Gaming is very much about strategy.
You are such a deep thinker.  I can see you doing really well.
I am pretty good at games.
Do you spend a lot of time playing?
How did the boy come out a girl?
Ha, that is a good question! Looks like the doctors are not always right.
Exactly, that is scientific evidence that doctors can be wrong.
We should write a book about it so people know!
Oh believe me, plenty of people know now!
Guess Remy will have to wear boy clothes for a bit!
I am really surprised i had a girl because the doctor told me it was going to be a boy
it is really surprising she got it wrong since she seemed to be so positive
well, i guess it's not that big of a deal really since it is a nice surprise
i guess we can take some things back to the store since we wont be needing them then
sounds like a good idea to me
This whole time I thought I was having a little boy.
Yeah, and so did everyone else.
Luckily we did gender neutral designs.
Yeah because that would've been a disaster.
Unless we did it like way back in the days when the colours were swapped.
That's right, pink was boys in blue was girls.
I am so sick of my brother getting into my things!
Let me guess, he lost something else?
Yes! He took my computer and lost it!
I bet you were so angry!
I was. I told my mom about it because I am so sick of him losing things!
Did you ever find it?
Carson was ignoring me all day. He was really into his work.
Why did you stay there then?
I didn't. I left so he could focus, but I was really hoping to hang out with him.
I'm sorry. The sooner he finishes the project the sooner he'll have time for you.
I know. I'm just impatient.
You have always been that way!
I'm going to leave you alone.
Thanks I need to concentrate on work.
We need money.
Money controls everything so that's right.
We need to pay bills.
I'll start working.
I threw the ball into the deep end of the pool, and dive in after it.
How deep was the pool?
Maybe nine or ten feet deep.
Is this your pool?
I was at my sister's house.
That's nice.
Did you see me dive in to get the ball?
Yeah, I did. So what?
I threw it in the deep end of the pool.
Its an inflatable pool.
Lauren! I'm going after the ball!
What? Where did you throw it?
In the deep end by accident! Sorry!
Can you wait until I get down there so we can stop shouting at each other?
Nope! Going after it!
Alright but don't forget to wear your floaties!
Here is the college that I wanted to go too. I got some information about online and showed my parents the information.
The is awesome that you did your research on this. I am proud of you.
I know I been looking at this for awhile now. I really want to go here.
Man that is what I need to start doing soon. Picking out what college I want to go to.
If you want some help let me know.
I've been searching for the best college to go to when I graduate high school and I finally found it.
Really?  That's great!  Did you apply yet?
No, not yet.  Last night I showed the brochures to my mom and dad and they aren't very happy with it.
Why not?  I thought they were so happy that you wanted to go to college.
They are, but they want me to go to a college closer to home, and the one I like is all the way across the country.
I'm sorry, it's going to make it more difficult for you if your parents don't support your decisions!
I don't think I've ever been so mad before in my life!
What happened?
I tore down all of the posters in my bedroom, threw away my record collection and got rid of the lamp too.
Why on earth did you do all of that?
Those were my girlfriend's things, and last week I learned she slept with another guy.
Yikes! I'm so sorry. No wonder you're mad.
I had a bonfire last night to burn all the rest of the stuff my girlfriend left at the house.
A bonfire? Did you get rid of all their stuff?
I was so angry about our fight and breakup that I threw out most of it but the paper and pictures I decided to burn.
Did you have a ceremony or something?
No, just some friends over after I'd cleaned up and we had drinks around the fire.
Well at least it sounds cathartic. I hope you feel better now.
You should have these tickets Skylar.
Thank you Sasha you are such a good friend.
I just hope you and your family can enjoy the show from a good seat.
You are the best Sasha, thanks,
No problem you know how much I love you guys.
And we love you too!
I gave up some space so Skylar could enjoy the show in comfort.
That was a nice gesture.
She would have done it for me.
I want more friends like you.
I'm a little busy right now cleaning Jan's room.
What are you doing cleaning someone else's room?
Jan Paid me to do some tidying up around her house.
Are you almost finished?
I won't be done for at least an hour. Her room's a mess!
I'll tell you what. Jan is a lifesaver.
Why, what happened with Jan?
Well, I'm overloaded at work and school. I don't have time to do my household chores.
I can understand that...you're always busy.
Yes, but Jan needs some money so I hired her to help with my house and she's doing an amazing job cleaning.
Great, it works out for both of you, then.
Hey friend, how are you?
I am well thank you. how are you?
I am good, Thanks for asking.
What's up?
Well nothing much, I cleaned Jan's room and she paid me money for house keeping.
That's good, you earned some money.
Jan's room was so nasty!
What made it nasty?
There was food on the ground.
Ew, how much food?
There was a full sub that was under the bed.
That is gross.  Were there bugs?
I need to help hikers here it's dangerous.
I agree, it's real bad around here.
What should I do to build it?
Start with water and warmth.
so blankets and fire?
yep!
Just finished building my last shelter?
The ones you have been on the trail?
Yea i put up seven total
Wow
Well i don't want anything to happen like to that poor girl
Oh i understand, that's awesome you did that though
I've been doing a lot of outdoor work lately at outposts.
What do you do so far out on trails?
I put together shelters far from the road so that stranded hikers will have some shelter to rest in while they wait for help.
That could save someone's life in the winter!
There is a lot of great beer out here
yes we know.  You drank it all and gave it away
This is some great beer for everyone
Overall it is great that you like it
yeah I sure do.  even finished it to the last drop
I can totally tell
I definitely needed to go to the bar after my day at work
Oh was it that bad?
Yeah I needed as many frosty beers as possible
That's always a good cure for a bad day!
Very true! I'm just hoping tomorrow will be better
I'm sure it will!
I am not sure what I was thinking!
Neither am I, I have never known you to go home with a stranger.
Mean either, but he was just so sweet and cute that I couldn't resist.
Did you spend the entire night with him or did you go back to your house?
I spent the whole night with him and he took me to breakfast in the morning.
Wow, well at least you got breakfast out of all of it!
Yeah so I met somebody last night at the bar.
Oh good for you, did you have fun together?
Yeah we spent some time together afterwards. It was good to have some human interaction.
Oh yeah, I know what you mean. Happy for you, man.
Hi, I'm Quinn. Nice to meet you.
Nice to meet you too. Would you like to dance and have a drink?
Sure. After this, where do you plan to go next? want to go home together?
My house. Sure. Let's go home together.
Do you have a car?
I'll drive us at my place.
I had to walk home from school yesterday. The bus driver said he'd be back but he never came.
That's awful. How long was the walk?
I love 3 miles away. It took over an hour. I stopped for some ice cream it was so hot.
Well at least you made it home safely. Next time you should call someone to drive you home.
I didn't get home until almost 6 last night.
Why what happened that took that long to get home?
Well the school bus never showed up to pick me up so I had to walk home.
That sucks. Why didn't the bus show up?
I have no idea. I was so tired by the time I got home that I ate dinner and laid down.
Well hopefully you got some good rest at least.
I'm not going to Jesse's party tomorrow night.
Why not?
Do you remember last year when he hit my mom's car and refused to pay for the damages, so I had to pay for it myself?
Yes. You weren't allowed to use your mom's car again and you had to ride your bike everywhere.
Yeah, well, I didn't forget that. Jesse is not to be trusted and he is selfish.
Okay, man. Let's see a movie instead.
Happy Valentines day Mike!
Happy Valentines day to you to Alex. I love you.
I made you this Valentines card.
Thank you.  I love it!
I knew you would.  You are my valentine.
And you are my valentine, Alex I adore you.
I decided to sell by motorcycle.
Why? That's one great looking Ducati.
I heard if you ride a motorcycle, the odds of dying in an accident are high.
If you don't ride one, the odds of dying of boredom are high too.
I never thought of that.
They call it opportunity cost.
I sold my motorcycle yesterday.
Why did you do that for?
I have been reading up on the odds of dying on the bike and I just found out I am going to be having a baby.
What! Congrats! It is a higher risk, since most of you guys won't wear a helmet.
I am going to buy a mini van.
Did you know I sold my motorcycle?
No way-why?
I saw this story on the news about motorcycles and it freaked me out- they're so dangerous!
Well doesn't everyone know motorcycles are dangerous?
Yeah, but for some reason I never thought I was taking that much of a risk.
Well you can use that money to put towards a nice car!
Alex kept the dog from me.
Well is there a reason why?
The dog was known to bit everyone it saw.
Damn, that dog needs training.
Sure does.
I can't believe this is finally over.
I still can't believe you sued the company because they wouldn't promote you.
I knew it was because I was female and I had so much proof.
Yeah, all of those emails and company documents just won your case for you.
They are crazy to think that I can't do the job. I taught all those guys how to do the job.
Yeah, isn't that crazy? But you'll be showing them now.
This nightmare is finally over.
I'm so proud of you and happy that you finally got it done.
It took a long time but I was not giving up this fight.
You did an amazing job and are an example to all women.
Thank you and I'm  going to try my best to make sure I live up to everything.
You don't have to try at all because you are that person already.
I wasn't expecting things to go the way they did.
Well you really put Taylor in an impossible situation.
I feel really bad for that too. Has Taylor said anything to you about what happened?
Only that you got him into a bad situation.
I'm going to owe him big time for what I got him into.
Maybe you can agree to pay his attorney fees.
Look Taylor, you have to come with me.  If you don't I am going to tell Rachel what you did with Cindy.
Dude seriously?  You are putting me in a really terrible position.
I'm sorry but I really need you to come along.  I can't do this without you.
You know Rachel means the world to me but I don't want to get involved in this mess you've made.
Sorry man, if you don't come along I'm going to tell her.
Fine.  I guess I'm coming.
My favourite news is the 10 o'clock news.
I love that too.
When you want to know what is going on, turn to that channel.
I never miss that.
It sure is my window to the world.
They give the best news.
I want to watch the news.
Yea it's important to get ahead.
Let's get some help watching
What do you mean?
How about read a newspaper.
let's find out what resources we have.
I never watch the news, but I really wanted to catch up on what was going on so I decided to watch the news the other night.
What did you see. It is never good.
I know. I wish I hadn't watched because it only made me sad.
Everything seems so sad on the news. I think that is what they like to do.
I know after it got done I had to put on a comedy just so I could go to sleep.
That is exactly why I never watch it anymore!
I heard it's supposed to get cold this evening.
Yeah, I saw that as well.
I think I'm going to wear pants when we go out rather than shorts.
That's a great idea, I think I'll wear pants, too.
Let's wear those matching pants we got a Zara's.
Sounds like a plan to me!
I think I'm going to wear pants tonight.
Really? But it's so hot today! I'm going to wear a skirt.
Well I checked the weather and it's supposed to drop down to the forties tonight. That's a bit cold for me.
Oh that is cold. I'm glad you told me! What colour pants are you wearing so I don't pick the same thing.
I'm was thinking of wearing my red pants.
Okay, I'll wear black ones then.
It's going to be chilly tonight.
Is it? It's pretty warm right now.
Yep! I checked the weather this morning. I wore this longer pants for that reason.
Oh that was a good idea. Hopefully I don't get too cold!
Always got to check the weather man, very important.
I will in the future, good plan.
Whoa! Its so cold today
Its freezing Skylar, and by the way, I saw you with some booty shorts. In this weather dear?
Crazy as it may sound, I could not handle the falling temperature. I had to put on some pants
You definitely had to. We don't want you falling sick at this time
The winter this year is extreme
I was wearing shorts earlier but I decided to change.
Why?  Your outfit looked really good.
Thanks, but the temperature is going to drop tonight.
Maybe I should have worn pants too.
Well, I'm always cold so maybe you'll be okay.
You're probably right.
I think people need to start standing up for the animals more often.
They do because they're so defenceless.
The zoo is one of the worst places for animals in this world.
Do you think we pay money in order to go see these poor animals held in jail.
That's how you have to look at it, maybe we will start cancelling the zoo.
If you need any help next time let me know because I want to go to the zoo and do some protesting as well.
Come to the zoo with me.
Great, I love looking at the animals.
I am not going to look at them; I'm going to protest their treatment.
What's bad about how they're treated?
How would you like to live in a cage?
You've made your point.  I'll get my jacket.
I really shouldn't have pushed the ball this far into the street
hopefully the cars will see it and not run it this time
I'm sure they will see it because it is bright yellow and is really noticeable
I would think they should but you never know
Oh no my ball! It rolled into the street!
It's too busy to go and get it right now! Wait until there is a red light
Will I have time to run and get it?
Yes if you hurry! Get ready to go and I will let you know when there is a red light
OK
Go! It's a red light
The ball was rolling out into the street when I saw the car speeding my way.  I had pushed it too hard.
Did the car stop in time?
Unfortunately not.  It was trying to avoid hitting the ball and crashed into the parked car instead.
Was anyone hurt?
The driver hit the windshield.  His head was bleeding.  The ambulance came quickly to take him away.
That's a bloody mess.
Alex proved to me he is a bum.
I had warned you.
I take the guy in and he doesn't pay his fair share of rent for two months straight.
It's time to give him the heave-ho.
I already evicted him.
It serves him right.
I had to evict Alex today and I feel really bad about it.
Isn't that your best friend? Why did you have to evict him?
Because he wasn't paying rent, and he is my best friend, but I also run a business.
How long was he not paying rent for?
He didn't pay me for two months straight, and it was about to be a third.
That sucks, but like you said, its a business.
I had to evict Alex today. I felt so damn bad but he wasn't paying his share of rent.
For how long?
He hasn't paid for two months straight and this is the third month coming up.
That's too bad. He's a good guy but I understand your point of view, too.
Thanks for not bashing me. I feel so bad about this.
Alex was evicted from our apartment after not paying his share of the rent for two months straight, and now we need to find a roommate.
I can ask around for you.
We are looking for a female who's cleans up after herself.
I'll make a note of that.  How much is rent?
To share a bedroom, it's $500 a month.
Not too bad.
I had never seen someone so drunk.
Was he hard to carry?
Oh yes, I used all of my muscles to drag him inside.
You are an amazing friend.
My whole body aches.
You need some pain killers.
I just walked in there and left his key on the table. I'm so pissed.
You did the right thing. You know that.
I do. I really don't want to be friends with Jesse anymore.
I'm sorry that you all fell out so quickly.
Me too. He was super fun when he's sober.
Yeah I could tell.
Man today was a good day.
Rumour is you got a big sale yesterday and made a lot of money.
It's true.
Wow that sure must feel good.
I think being a car salesman is working out for me.
Did you have another sale?
Yeah, I made a great deal yesterday.
Was the commission big?
It was a lot of money.
You've found your calling.
I had a good day yesterday.
At the car dealership?
Yes, I made a big sale.
And does that mean big money for you?
Yes, it does.
Good for you.
I made a lot of money!
When and how?
Yesterday, I'm in sales.
What kind of sales.
care sales.
I want to buy a car!
We've been at this for over two hours. Is there anybody else who wants to try it?
I think everybody has already tried.
I think Bailey was the best of all. I may give him another chance.
At this point you have nothing to lose.
Bailey is ready and I think after this break he will do great.
Ok. Let me call him back in for another try.
So I really hate Addison.
Why?  What did she do?
She broke up with me. I made a plan to kill her last night.
That's super messed up, why are you telling me this?
I got a big knife and some quiet shoes to sneak in on and I stabbed her.
Wow, I am going to call the cops, you're sick.
Addison has the role of Marion in the play based on the Hitchcock film
And you, of course, are Norman....
Of course. And she has triggered my psychotic murderous impulses....
And Marion is now in the shower....
Yes, and I have my sneakers on so she can't hear me over the water....
OMG, whose nutty idea was it to turn Psycho into a play?
I was out with some friends last weekend and tried to impress them with how much I could drink.  I tossed back a glass of wine in record time.
How much did you end up drinking?
Way too much!
Did you succeed in impressing them?
I'm not sure.  I was too drunk to tell! And I paid for it the next day.  I had a really bad hangover.
I have such a headache today.
Did you go to a party or something?
No, just to a bar with some friends. But I normally don't drink and last night I was doing shots.
Why would you do shots if you don't drink? That sounds kind of risky.
I don't know. I guess I wanted to impress everyone and look more fun than I am. I tossed back quite a few whiskeys.
Well drink lots of water today. You're probably dehydrated.
I always wonder if my friends like me.
I am sure they do because you are such a kind person.
Sometimes though i feel like I have to impress them.
How do you do that?
Well at the party we had some drinks and I did a little trick tossing the drink behind me after I drank just to show them I was cool too.
You are cool. I'm sure they thought that even without the drink tricks
I went car shopping yesterday.
How'd it go?
Well, I looked and looked and finally found one that fit my style.
And what style is that?
Cool and sporty, of course.
Well, of course, I should have known.
I got the best SUV at the dealership.
Does it have good gas mileage?
34 miles to the gallon!
Wow, where did you get the money?
My uncle gave it to me.
Well can you pay back the money you owe me?
I found the car I want finally.  It's taken me a while and I've visited many dealerships.
Are you going to buy it?
It's a bit out of my price range.  I'll see if my parents will help me out with the down payment.
I hope they do.
Me too.  It's my dream car.  Just everything is exactly as I want it.
You can drive me to the movies when you buy it.
I finally picked out a car I like.
Did you go to the dealers for it?
Yeah, that's where I found it. I searched for hours and must have sat in dozens of cars.
That's a lot of work. I am guessing you're certain about the one you picked.
I sure am. and I love it. It's exactly my style.
Congratulations. I can't wait to see it.
You need to calm down because you're being very aggressive
I'm sorry, i just got a little excited and got carried away
Well, don't do it anymore or i will walk right out of here and go home
I will try and think harder before i make any dumb mistakes again
I really hope you do.,
I gave Cameron a hug when I saw him this morning.
You must be so glad to See him back from vacation.
You are so right.
How long have you known each other?
We have been friends since high school.
That is a lot of years of friendship.
It was really nice to see Cameron back from vacation.
Seems like he was gone for a while.
He was. That's why I gave him a big hug.
I bet he appreciated that.
Not really. He was a bit sunburnt.
That must have been a painful hug.
I really love studying animals and insects. They are my favourite subjects!
How did you get so good at knowing the different kinds of animals and insects?
I put in a lot of time studying, now I am able to identify every species in the book!
That's awesome! Could you teach me what you know sometime?
Of course, I love sharing my knowledge on these subjects!
Thank you! You really are a great friend.
I love nature and everything that it has within it. I love learning about animals and insects
That is awesome, I love nature as well but I don't think I can out beat you on that.
I know every thing and I can identify everything within this book.
Man that is a task I might be able to identify a few things but not everything.
Years of practice man.
That Alex has taken my lunch from the break room fridge for the last time.
What are you going to do?
I have some leftovers from last week at home, I'm going to bring them and put them in the fridge here.
Do you think he'll eat them?
He's eaten everything I've brought for the past week. I hope he enjoys 8 day old fish.
I hope he doesn't get sick!
I hope Alex learned her lesson.
What did she need to learn?
She was being really mean, so I was mean back to her.
Did she stop being mean?
She was taken aback, I think she has a bully mentality.
Bullies do back down if they're confronted.
I was the first one to leave the party last night.
Why did you leave before everyone else?
Last party they stayed until 3 am. I had to be at work at 7. So I left at 11.
That sounds sensible you can't go to sleep at 3 and get back up at 6.
I did it last party. It was brutal the whole day I was so tired.
Yeah, your rest comes first. It would have been hard to work that tired.
I need to get up early for work tomorrow. I'm sure you do too.
Yes, I have a very early day.
I am going to leave now and head for home. I'd love to party all night but I'm not a kid anymore.
I may be heading out right behind you.
I'm going over to say goodbye to the host first.
I'll come with you to say goodbye.
I really have to finish this assignment bill
come on, one game wont kill you
no, i want to get a good grade in this class it will really help me out
what is it anyway
its advanced nuclear physics
Jesus just the name scares me
I really need to go to the grocery store.
What do you need to buy?
I need another turkey. I burned the one I was cooking.
You'd better hurry. I think the store closes early today. And they might be running low on turkeys.
I know. But I'm not wearing any clothes.
Well that is a conversation for another time. But for now, get dressed and get your butt to the store.
I need to replace the turkey I burnt.
You do know you aren't wearing any clothes.
I'm in a rush and just going to wear my robe.
How about you drive in your robe and I will run into the store?
Great idea!
Grab your keys and let's go.
I had the craziest Thanksgiving this year! How was yours?
It was boring. What happened with you?
I burnt the turkey and I needed to go out and get a new one, but I was completely naked.
What? Why were you naked?
I hate wearing clothes so I tried to go out and buy it naked, but the owner turned me away.
That is a crazy story!
I felt so embarrassed at the store, I wasn't wearing any clothes.
You mean, you went to the store naked?
Well, with the exception of my underpants, yes!
That's crazy Kendall, why?
I was drinking too much wine and I burnt the turkey, had to return it.
That's unbelievable Kendall!
So I took a fertility pill before we, you know -
Are you trying to have a baby?
I mean we've been pretty casual about it, but I guess it worked.
Are you guys pregnant!
We are!
Oh my god! Congratulations!
I took a pill.
I think it works it's been so long.
You've been great in this.
Yea let's do it again.
No worries right.
None at all.
I got into a small accident with Jan's car.
OH! sorry. have you repaired the car?
No he asked me not to.
What did he do about it.
He repaired it and cost him many dollar
OH! thanks to him.
I think i may have made a big mistake today
well, what did you do this time?
i got in a small accident and ruined Casey's car
that is going to cost her a bunch of money
i can probably pay her back in a few months
I still can't believe that I hit that other car.
What are you doing to do it is going to cost Jan a lot.
I plan on paying for it, it was my fault.
I know but still her cost will still raise because of this.
I am scared to see how much this will cost Jan.
The accident I got into with Jan's car is costing a lot of money!
How? I thought it was just a small accident?
I thought so too, but the paint on her car is a special custom paint, so that alone is over $1,000
Well damn, remind me to never have custom paint on my car.
Yeah, or let me drive it so it needs to be redone.
Accidents happen man, its just money, you can make more tomorrow.
I don't know if you already heard, but next month I am leaving on a sabbatical and backpacking all over the world.  I've been saving money and preparing for this for so long.
Really?  That's so awesome!  I think that will be such a great adventure for  you.
I really can't wait.  I love my job but backpacking has always been a really big goal for me.
I'm really proud of you.  Are you going alone?  Because I think that would be something I would love to do also, and if you want company, I so much would love to go with you.
Really?  Oh my god, I would honestly love it if you could do this with me.  It would be our greatest adventure together!
Well then, I have some money saved up, and I will start putting back more money each pay check so we can go together!  I'm in!
Oh I cant speak now.
Yeah, my voice is shot too.
Same, I was screaming to much during the game.
I feel you it was a good game.
I am hungry but I can't eat much
Why's that? Is your stomach upset?
That's not it. I had a tooth removed yesterday so it's still sore.
Toothache  is terrible. I hope you get better sooner.
It is better than yesterday. I had to visit the dentist because I could not chew food due to pain.
What problem did he diagnose?
Bill finally took me the new deli on 4th but my tooth hurt so bad I couldn't enjoy the food
It sounds like you are going to have that looked at
Even though I hate that idea, I went to the dentist Monday, was there all day!
Did they find the problem?
Sure did, I needed a root canal, the procedure was uncomfortable but the tooth feels better now
Thank God! Good thing you didn't let that go any longer
I finally went to the dentist since the tooth pain was so bad.
What did the dentist say?
I needed a root canal.
That's not good news.
It wasn't. But at least I had it done a few days ago.
That explains why you're eating all my food.
I hope your mom enjoyed her Valentines card. She seemed sad.
Thanks Ash. My dad has not observed Valentines Day in 20 years. No card no candy nothing.
Dude, maybe there's more to it.
Well, they really haven't spoken in 20 years
Wow, but why are they together?
Soulmates in silence?
I got a valentine's card for Cameron's mom too
That's thoughtful
Yeah my mom said she'd feel left out if I didn't
Yeah your mom and Cameron's are good mothers they deserve it
I enjoy Cameron's mom's company so I thought it was wise
It was a great idea
I just bought a brand new Mercedes.
That's nice, I really don't care.
Remy we were together for 10 years you could show some support.
Ever since we split I couldn't care less what you do because you are no longer a part of my life.
Wow I still care about you and want the best for you I can't believe you don't want the same for me.
Well believe it, we are over and so is this conversation.
of course i will go out on a date with you next week
Do you like lobster and shrimp?
those are two of my favourite foods in the world
sounds great then. i will pick you up around 4 next Friday and we can go to the new restaurant
So you know Jordan, right?
Yes, he's that guy from work.
Yeah, so he asked me out on a dinner date next week.
Exciting! What did you tell him?
I said yes!
Aw, you'll have to let me know how it goes!!
I wanted a puppy, but when I went to the shelter, they only had adult dogs.
Did you adopt a dog?
I adopted a golden retriever from the shelter.  She's adorable.
Did you name her yet?
Her name is Sunshine.
That's beautiful.
I always wanted a puppy!
But why did you adopt this old shelter dog
I adopted her because no one wanted to adopt her,
That is do considerate of you!
While I always wanted a puppy, I think I will get an older dog.
Really? What caused your change of heart?
Just seeing these sad older dogs in there made me feel empathy for them.
Aww, that is so sweet.
Just honest!
I'm really happy with Rex
you seem happy, i thought you wanted a puppy though
i did, but a friend told me about those poor dogs in the shelter
there are a lot of them
the second i saw him i knew he was for me
that's so sweet, he is a great dog
You will never guess what happened to me today. I just got home from the police station.
Oh my god, tell me!
I was at the shopping centre, getting ready to walk in and I was grabbed from behind. They started to pull me towards their van but I got away.
Was there anyone else around? Did you see them?
I did get a peek at a one of them and his tattoos. So I called the cops and I went down to give a statement. I hope they catch them.
Me, too. That just gives me the chills thinking about that happening to you.
Yesterday was my day for show and tell
What special thing did you do?
I walked my dog to school
It must really be fun then.
Yes! i enjoyed it.
My dog is really loving the weather right now
He just cant stop wagging his tail and sticking his tongue out
I think i have to stop soon and get him some water because he might be thirsty
Yea, we don't want him to get dehydrated from the heat
I got an A on my show-and-tell today. I showed my dog as mine.
They let you bring your dog to school.
Yes, and I showed everyone some tricks and how smart he is.
I bet your dog was a big hit with the kids.
Oh, he was. And the teacher loved him. It was fun.
I didn't think it was such a bad idea to bring my dog to school today.
You didn't find it a odd choice?
No way, it was show and tell and it was my turn!
Well normally you would bring in a toy, or a souvenir to show off.
Well my dog just turns out to be my favourite thing to show off to others.
That's obvious to everyone now!
Have you seen anything about the PlayStation 5 Mega Ultra Pro?
There is no such game as that!
Yes there is!  I have it.
How do you have that game when it doesn't exist?
My dad is the CEO of Sony and he got me the very first game off the line.  Would you want to come play with me tonight?  Cameron, it's the greatest game console in the world.
Uh, yeah!  Can I just ride the school bus home with you after school so we can start playing as soon as possible???
Hey Cameron Dingo Riders 3 just came out want to come out and play
You got a copy? How its sold out everywhere
My uncle randomly saw one hidden on the shelves in a Walmart
That is lucky man, yea i really want to try it out
Come over now I'm ready to game
Ok let me just drop this off at home and ill be right over
Hey Cameron, want to come play the new game I got?
Sure, what game?
The new Madden.
Oh sweet, that sounds fun.
Just come over whenever you're ready.
Alright, see you soon.
Hey do you want to come over and play my new video game?
Sure! What game is it?
It's the new Red Dead 2
Oh I've heard that's really fin
Yah, it's only one player but we can take turns
Yah sounds awesome!
I planted a garden this weekend. Most I won't have to buy vegetables in the store anymore.
Oh Miss green thumbs. You have to give me some when they are grown.
I will. I don't need a million tomatoes and zucchinis. .
Hmm lots of zucchini bread appears to be in your future.
My garden is starting to come up!
Oh, I didn't even know you had planted one.
Yeah, I was getting tired of having to buy nasty veggies from the store.
When did you plant most of it?
In the last few months. It took a while to weed the area and everything.
Send some my way if you have any extras. I'd love to try some.
I planted a garden this weekend. I can't wait for it to grow.
Why'd you decide to plant a garden?
I got tired of getting vegetables at the store. I want fresh vegetables.
That's great. I have a small garden and I love it.
I got in a lot of trouble for what I did with Alex's presents.
I know, I can't believe you opened them all.
I knew better, but I couldn't stop myself. And then I felt really bad.
I'm sure you won't do it again, at least. Isn't that true?
Yeah, it's true. There was too much bad feelings afterward, for everyone, because of what I did.
Then it was a good lesson for you.
I got grounded for a week!
What did you do to get that long?
I ended up Alex's presents on his birthday, I was just so excited and wanted to see what he got.
If you had not opened the presents you would not have gotten grounded.
I know, but it was worth seeing his face.
I couldn't wait.  So I opened all of Alex's presents.
But they are his presents. It's his birthday.
I know. But I was so curious.
You know what curiosity did to the cat, don't you?
Well, Alex is pretty mad.
Luckily, I only gave him a toy gun.
I did something horrible!!!
What? What did you do?
I couldn't wait and I opened all of Alex's presents on his birthday.
I can't believe you did that! Those are his presents.
I know. And now he's mad at me.
As he should be!
I know everyone is mad at me for what I did.
Everyone is more than Matt, they are angry.
Look, she deserved everything that she got.
I think you're just going overboard now.
I'm just tired of everyone blaming me for everything including this fire
Did you not set it on purpose?
Robin's house was already scheduled to be demolished.
Is that the reason you set it on fire.
Yes, It will be demolished anyway.
You are so cold and mean.
Nothing to worry about.
Thankfully no one is hurt.
Have you heard that Robin's house is due for a demolition?
I've heard that it is so old that it is considered a hazard.
Yes. I had lots of fun setting it on fire and watching it burn.
Isn't that illegal?
I had permission from Robin, and it is going to be bulldozed to the ground anyway.
I think you are a pyromaniac.
I feel like an arsonist!
Well, Robin's house was going to be demolished anyway.
I know, but that way we could collect on the insurance.
You mean to say you set the house on fire to collect insurance?
That's correct, we can gain a lot of money this way.
That's criminal!
I got a call for a new client today
You still working in the investment firm?
Part time now but I am glad to help
Did you fulfil their needs?
I advised them on all matters
You need to work full time again
I befriended this sweet girl today.  She introduced me to all the cool kids.
You are in with the cool crowd.
I am new to the school so I want to be friendly to everyone.
You make friends easily.  I don't worry about you.
People are very friendly to me at my new school.
That's better than if they were mean to you.
I made some new friends already at school.
Wow, you have only been there a few days!
I know. I met this nice guy named Quinn and he introduced me to all the cool kids.
That's nice! I am glad things are working out for you there.
Me too. I was pretty nervous starting out here.
I am sure it is going to be fine, especially if you already have friends.
I had a great day at school today.
I was worried that you would have a hard time fitting in.
Yeah, but I met this person named Quinn.
Quinn sounds like a good friend.
Yeah, Quinn introduced me to all the coolest kid.
It sounds like you have a lot of new friends!
I'm confused, is Andy dating Brandy, or is Mandy dating Andy?
No, Mandy is dating Randy and Andy is single but used to date Brandy who is currently trying to start a relationship with Sandy, but she's too scared to commit.
Wait, who's Sandy!?
Don't worry about her, she's one of the weird ones so you're probably better off staying away from her altogether.
But Andy and Mandy are cool?
See, now you're getting it!
OK if you don't be quiet you will regret it.
Boo hoo, why don't you piss off boomer.
Ok that tears it, get in the car right now.
Can we watch a movie in the car?
Grab your tablet and be quiet .
Yeah, road trip.
You are being loud.
But we are hungry!
Yea but hang in there.
Why?
I have a small group in the house.
Ok, we will wait here in the car.
The kids were being so loud inside, when the people came to tour the house.
How did you get them to be quiet?
I told them to go and sit in the car and watch a movie while they were here.
That is a good idea, I am going to have to try that next time I need a break from Chris.
That's a nice trophy Janice
Thanks and good job on yours
Thank you, i cant believe we both won our categories
Yea our training really has started to pay off
Master Chi is a great Karate teacher
I think he's the best
I was already tired before I came in the work.
What were you doing?
I had to show  up without my snowed in car.
Did you park it on the side of the road?
I did and the plods didn't help me out at all.
Don't you hate when they do that?
I was late to work today.
Why were you late?
It snowed all night and I was blocked in.
Oh, you had to shovel the snow?
Yeah, and it took me forever.
I hope you didn't get in trouble with your boss!
It's time for me to go to work this morning, but my car is surrounded with snow. It snowed all night.
Are you able to move the car after you crank it?
No, the snow is too heavy. It's blocking me from driving.
What are you going to do?
I'll call my job and tell them I'll be late. I'm shovelling the snow now.
Stay warm as you shovel the snow.
I am working to overcome my fears.
That is a worthy endeavour.
I want to tackle my fear of the dark.
What have you done about it?
I went hiking in the woods by myself to prove I was not afraid of the dark.
Was that you I saw last night running from the woods?
I took a walk in the forest last night all be myself.
I thought you were scared of things that might jump out at you in the dark.
I was, so I figured I had to try to conquer my fears.
I'm very impressed with you for being so brave.
Thanks, and I feel better about the night-time now.
There are so many fun things to do at night, and now we can do them together!
I had a really bad crash today on my skateboard.
Really? You don't look very banged up. All I see is a scratch on your leg.
I know how to fall. An experienced skateboarder once taught me how to tuck and roll if I ever got into a bad crash.
That's a valuable skill to have.
I fell at the skate park today , but that truck on how to fall I learned from that good skater saved me .
Wow. That's great that you know how to fall properly. I hope you weren't hurt . . .
No I got a tiny scrape on my knee but I am fine.
You are going to be the expert soon with all of your skating.
I almost got hurt skateboarding but a more experienced skateboarder taught me how to avoid getting hurt.
What did he teach you?
He taught me how to brake my fall instinctively.
Wow! That's so cool. Can you teach me?
I can show you right now.
My left arm is throbbing right now.
I see you have a band-aid on your arm. Did you cut yourself?
No, I got a flu shot at work today.
That's good you're taking preventative measures.
Yes, I think it's best to prevent the flu from spreading this season given the unknowns of COVID.
You should switch out your band-aid to a new one, since the current one is fraying.
I am so glad that I got that flu shot at work. This flu season is terrible.
Yeah, you probably helped stop the spread by getting the shot. It's important.
I usually try to get it every year. I don't like getting sick.
Me neither. I really should get one too.
You will just not believe this one.
Did something happen after the trial?
I wrote a story about the case and posted it on my blog page.
So far so good.
Someone was really upset with the blog and sent me a death threat.
Call the police.
I wrote a story on the trial and posted it to their blog page.
What happened?
After that I started getting death threats.
Oh man, I'm so sorry.
I'm going to buy a gun.
Good stuff.
I'm scared.
What's the matter?
Well, you know that story I wrote about the trial?
Yes, you showed it to me.
I posted it on my blog and got a death threat.
You have to call the police.
I am impressed with my new head of the marketing department.
How so?
His name is Jordan and he came in with a lot of good ideas.
Give me an example.
I implemented one of his programs where customers get credit for their loyalty in a unique way.  I'll tell you more about later; I've got to get to work.
I am really interested in hearing more about it.
Since I have started hiking I have started feeling a lot more energetic.
Really? I would think it would wear you down.
No actually it has made me feel really great!
Wow I had no idea. Maybe I need to start exercising more also.
I would really recommend it. I have never felt so good.
Let me know when you are going to take your next hike and I will join you!
I started hiking because I want to be healthier.
Where do you hike?
There are mountains behind my house.  I just walk up the hills and get on the trails.
That's convenient.
I need to make a habit of it.  It feels great to get out in nature.
We are need to get moving.
I really have been struggling with my health lately.
How so, what is wrong?
I get chest pain and shortness of breath. I have started hiking and that has alleviated some of the pain though.
That is great to hear, keep up the exercise!
Oh yes, I will!
I am so excited that we are getting engaged
yeah it is really a positive thing in my life happening
I am so happy and looking forward to spending the rest of my life with you
I am happy as well.
I cant wait to have the big wedding
likewise
I heard you guys were throwing a big event
that's right, a huge party!
if you need some help, I am happy to help!
yes please, you can help us with the food orders?
I can do that, I'll get on it now
great, thanks!
I'm helping a friend through a party Saturday. It's a pretty big event.
That sounds like fun.
I don't think so. I think it's going to be a lot of work.
Why did you volunteer?
She's trying to get her catering business off the ground. I want her to be a success.
You are a really good friend to work on your day off.
What are you guys up to?
We're planning a graduation party.
I'm not in your class, but I'd like to help.
Sure, we'd love to have you join in.
What can I do?
Right now listen to what we're planning and decide what you can help with.
Hey, Karen!  It's been such a long time since we saw each other, come give me a hug!
It's great to see you again  It feels like it's been forever!
It has been a long summer.  How have you been?
I been doing so good, I got a summer job and a new boyfriend!
That's great and I'm so happy for you!  You can let me go now, that's the longest hug I ever got from anyone!
Hahaha, I'm sorry, I'm just so excited to see you again!
I think that shade I put over Austin's garden is going to really protect his flowers.
Are you looking over Austin's garden.
Yeah for a little while. I tend to them while he's gone.
That's really sweet of you to do that for him.
I don't mind since I actually love gardening.
Hopefully Austin gives you some flowers to thank you.
Last week when Austin went out of town for a few days, he asked me to take care of his garden.
Really?  Does he have a nice garden?
He does, but I noticed that some of his flowers were the type that do better when they're not in direct sunlight all day long.  So for a surprise I built him a nice little shade for that corner of his garden
Wow, that was really nice of you!
I thought so too, but Austin got mad at me for interfering and told me to get my stuff and leave and don't ever come back to his house or speak to him for the rest of his life.
I think that seems a little extreme...I guess I won't give him that set of trowels and gardening gloves I was planning to give him for his birthday...
Carson just like fell on the floor and her face was purple.
Did you call the ambulance?
Yeah, I had the waitstaff call and then I gave her CPR.
Did her heart stop?
Yeah, that's why I did the CPR. Luckily the ambulance got there in time, and she survived.
I'll have to call Carson's mom later.
Oh my goodness I had a life and death moment today.
What happened are you okay you're shaking.
I am now I don't know what I would have done with Carson.
So please tell me what happened what did Carson do?
I went swimming in the lack and had been down there for more time than I should of.  Carson saw me and pulled me out and performed CPR.
Wow, if he hadn't been there it would have been terrible for you!
I am not sure if we could cross.
There is a construction.
I will just ask the workers about it.
Be careful. It is not safe within the construction.
I will just call their attention.
That is better for everyone.
Jesse was the best at consulting me with this business.
This means that things turned out great for you guys?
Yep, this business is going to be amazing
As long as you have Jesse around.
Jessie's going to be on staff for sure
I don't know about that one, she's tough when it comes to this.
I am so happy I got help from Jesse
yeah he has great business skills
His help allowed me to increase my profits by like 10% alone
that is great. What part did he help you with?
he helped with the overall business plan
that's great, I should ask him for help too
I asked Jesse to consult the business plan
how well did he do in that department
well enough, he's astute with business
did he increase your profits?
yes by a crazy amount!
I'm so happy for you
I have to thank you, Jesse.
What for?
Your ideas have increased my profits.
Well, I'm happy you consulted with me on your business plan.
Yes, it really worked out.
I'm here if you need any more assistance.
you're such a good person bailey I like talking to you about life
thanks Jan you're a great friend
I just want to make sure that you have good life goals and are on the right path
thanks I want to try a lot to be successful
I like mentoring you and I want to see you do well
thank you
I'm involved in everything.
Thanks for mentoring me.
Thanks for helping me too.
Let's improve each other's lives!
Welcome to the club this is great.
This is awesome.
I am glad that you have chosen me to be your mentor.  I have a lot I can teach you.
I am involved with so many clubs here at school that I thought that having a mentor would help me with everything.
I have a lot of experience with the clubs since I am a senior.  I have been on this campus for 4 years now.
I knew you would be a perfect fit for me.
I am thankful that you thought of me like that.
Indeed I do.
I'm so happy that I'm able to help Bailey so much.
How are you helping her again?
I'm mentoring her. It really seems like her life is improving too.
That's good. But keep in mind that she might lean on you in hard times.
Sheree, I am so stupid. I can't keep important stuff to myself.
Well, you are the kind of person that can't keep your feeling to yourself.
This is not about me. I spilled the beans about the surprise party for Addison.
Come on Sydney. You could have kept that to yourself. Its only tomorrow. What's one day.
I know but Addison hates surprises and will call out sick.
Well, you better fix this. We spent over a thousand bucks on this stupid party.
I can't believe I accidentally told someone about the surprise party today.
Yeah only a few people were supposed to know about that.
I know I just get really excited sometimes and I forget.
I mean as long as it doesn't get back to the person you are actually having the party for then I guess it's fine.
Yeah I feel like he won't find out because the person I told doesn't talk to him.
Hopefully he doesn't and the party is still a success.
This new software is so amazing.  I was able to get new clients easily.
What is the software?
It's an application that I install on my tablet that I can show everything about the car on it. I can give them a tour of the whole car.
That's awesome.  Your clients can get a virtual tour.
It helps me seal the deal.
That's what matters.
Hey it's pretty crazy but there's a parade downtown and it's like the best parade and party they've ever thrown for the city.
I heard about it, you told me yesterday.
Yes but it's just so cool and I think our whole class including all the cheerleaders and football team will be going there.
I'm very aware since everyone is talking about it already.
I can't wait to go and think it'll be such an amazing time for everyone involved.
I get it, I know already and I'm going to go to it.
I went to the bar with our friends.
I saw you were not home.
I had a few cocktails.
That is acceptable.
I made some jokes.
It sounds as if you were the life of the party.
It's always nice to catch up with old friends.
What did you all end up doing?
We went to the dive bar down the street and did karaoke.
Well, that sounds like fun.  Did you do a song?
I don't want to talk about my singing and how people laughed!
I can only imagine!
These drinks are great.
I'm having a lot of fun. Let's order more drinks.
We don't want to become stoned. That would be hilarious but not good.
You're right. Let's dance. The music has a great beat.
After I finish this cocktail, I'm heading for the dance floor.
I'll wait for you.
I'm having a great time.
Me too; I hadn't heard that joke before.
Let's have another drink.
I love this bar.
I come here all the time.
I will too from now on.
I put together a fun playdate for my kids and Carson's kids.
Don't they have friends of their own to play with?
There aren't very many kids in the neighbourhood, so they're always playing along when Carson's kids aren't over.
I hope they hit it off. Both you and Carson have great kids, so there's no reason they won't get along.
Lee didn't want me to feel cold.
Did lee warmed you up.
To some extent but he put Cameron's sweater around me.
That is so thoughtful of him
He is such a nice person.
Thanks for the sweater Lee.
You're welcome. You looked cold.
It is getting chilly. I love how this sweater feels, it's so soft.
It's Cameron's. He left it at my house.
Well thanks for being such a nice guy, and thank Cameron for having such great taste in sweaters!
I'll be sure to let him know!
Lee is a nice person.
Everyone knows that.
He saw I was cold and did something about it.
He is very considerate.
He put Cameron's sweater around me to keep me warm.
I hope that didn't leave Cameron out in the cold.
I just came back from court, it has been an stressful day.
Why were you in court? What happened?
I took my parents to court because they didn't let me be myself and play my videogames as much as I want, they want me to follow their rules.
They are your parents, you suppose to follow their rules, come on lol
No, is not fair when they want to be telling you what to do all the time, so I am taking them to court so I can do what I want!
Good luck my friend, keep me posted on how things goes at the court.
I finally did it. I took my parents to court of the video game issue.
No you did not. What happened?
They would not let me play video games as much as I wanted so that's what they get.
So you are going to let the court make them let you play more?
Yes, that is it. I'm going to win too.
I'm taking my parents to court.
Why would you do such a thing?
Because they wont let me play video games.
That's silly.
Hey Jan. I heard you needed a job.
Yes, that's right. My company closed because of the lockdowns.
If you're interested, you can work at my coffee shop.
Yes, that would be great.
Awesome, come Monday.
I'll be there. Thanks for the opportunity.
hey friend, how are you?
I am fine thank you, how are you?
I am well too, I met Jan and she was looking for some work so I gave her an opportunity to come for work at my coffee shop.
Okay, You did good for Jan. you are kind and generous, appreciate it.
Thanks!
We should help people who are in need.
I gave Jan a job at the coffee shop.
Was she looking for a job?
Yeah, she had been looking for work for a while.
Does she know anything about how to make coffee?
I figure if she doesn't she can just take care of cleaning the tables.
That's going to be weird since I go to your coffee shop all the time.
I wish I had waited to try out for basketball instead of football.
Why. You are so good at football
I'm better at basketball and basketball is inside and less contact.
Yeah. Maybe talk to the basketball coach. He may let you walk on late.
I can't do that because we are still in playoffs. Basketball will have started several weeks before football is over.
I guess next year you'll play basketball.
I've been thinking of trying out for some more teams.
You are really good at sports. I think you should.
I joined the football team.
Wow, congratulations. I bet the try-outs were hard.
They were. I'm sure the practices and games will be challenging as well.
You will do great.
There is a lot of stuff out here for me to do but I really want to play that game you have.
Oh you do?  Yeah this game looks like it can be really fun to play
Do you even have the right controllers and stuff?
Yes I do.  There is a lot of stuff out here to help me get the right controllers.  Ill be playing immediately
That's awesome!  I think you should do this regularly in regards to getting games and such
yeah i really should
I saw Lee new video game
Did you play it?
Not yet.
Did you ask Lee?
Yes, I did.
Okay
Lee got this really cool new video game.  I saw him holding it and asked him if I could try it.
Did he let you play it?
He did.  It's actually a two person game so we played together.
Was it as cool as it looked?
Even cooler.  I want to save up and get it for myself.
Hey Lee, is that the new video game?
Yes it is Taylor!
Do you think I could play it?
Sure thing! It is a lot of fun. Here ya go.
Thanks a lot Lee!
I saw Lee with the new video game.
I've heard it is great. Have you played it yet?
I borrowed it from Lee and I will be playing it tonight.
I'd love to be your first opponent.
Why don't you come to my house tonight?
I will definitely make time for that.
Do you have any plans for this weekend?
Well Amy asked me to go to her house but I'm not sure. Why?
I was thinking we could hang out, I do not like Amy.
Okay, well, I suppose we could hang out.
Sounds good.
See you then.
There is a lot of people in our circle who don't care for one another and honestly I don't care for your friend Amy
Right
There is a lot to choose and there is some stuff that I cant do.  You're going to have to make a choice to either see me or Sydney
that's fair.  I hope I don't have to do this on a consistent basis.  I hate choosing who I have to be around because I like both of you guys
yeah but whatever we decide to do this weekend I don't think Amy needs to be in the picture
okay sounds like a plan
It was hard for me to pick who to see this weekend.
How did you end up deciding?
I asked Sydney whom she would like to see this weekend.
Did she pick Amy?
No, I hate Amy, so Sydney chose another friend.
Why do you hate Amy?
The math test was so easy . I knew how to answer all the problems.
You are better at math than anyone.
No, I'm not that good. I just study a little more.
You always get As in math class for a reason.
This is a really hard test that I am about to go to right now.
What is the test in?
It is a math test, but is pretty difficult.
Oh, geese well I hope you do okay on the test.
Oh, I'll be fine, I understand the problems and subject matter so it will be easy.
Well that's good, you'll definitely get a good grade on it then.
Honestly, sometimes I am so clumsy. Last night, I stumbled over the stool in my living room.
Ouch. That's a bad looking bruise. It doesn't look like it tickled.
Not at all. Even though I managed to break my fall with one of the couch pillows that were on the floor.
Broke your fall? You like you almost broke your knee, not your fall.
Can you believe it? Would you look at the size of that scrape, just from that little fall.
You have to be more careful, Carson. I swear, half the time you don't even look where you're going.
Look out! I'm throwing this for you!
You saved my head from getting hit but my knee got scraped by the pavement.
Hold on, I am bringing my first aid kit back for you.
Please hurry!
Here it is, take whatever you need.
Thank you so much!
I broke my fall using the pillow but I still scraped my knee badly.  It was bleeding a lot.
Did you go to the doctor?
No, I just cleaned my knee and wrapped it up with some gauze I had in my medicine cabinet.
Did that stop the bleeding?
It did after a while.  It's still sore.
It'll take time for it to completely heal.
I sent Lee a message last night.
What did you say? And did he respond?
I asked him out on a date and he said okay!
Congrats! When's the date?
We're going to the movies on Saturday.
I was the cook yesterday.
You were in charge of the barbecue?
Yes, and I couldn't get the grill to light.
What did you do?
I raked the coals and I got it started up.
I imagine that was a relief.
I'm not sure when dinner will be ready, I am having trouble with the grill.
What is the problem?
I can't seem to get it to light.
Did you try to rearrange the charcoal?
Yeah, I did rake the coals over.  They are grey on the edges but don't seem to be really burning.
You can try to add some more starter fluid, but be careful when you relight the coals.
i had such a hard time getting the barbecue going today.
What was wrong with it?
I thought it was wet coals or something but I think they were just old. I raked them out.
So did you manage to get it started?
Yes with a little more effort, I got it lit and had an amazing grilled fish.
Then it was worth the effort! good job!
I think we have come far already. Let's get back to the base.
No way. We are close to the top of the mountain.
You know that I am scared of heights.
I know but it would be great accomplishment if you could reach the top.
Okay. Let's go up and get to the top.
That's spirit! You will be very happy once you reach the summit.
I was home all day today taking care of Kai who wasn't feeling well.
I usually do that for the people I love as well.
Yeah, Kai just was feeling terrible and all he wanted was my food and my care.
Oh, that is so great that you take care of him like that, he is so lucky.
Yeah, he would do it for me, and like you said, you do it for your loves.
Absolutely, that is what love is all about.
I bought a new boat today.
I thought that you just got your hours cut at work?
I did, but the woman I bought it from sold it for a couple hundred bucks.
Who does that?
Her husband had died and I don't think she knew its value.
I think you took advantage of her ignorance.
I feel like a thief.
Did you steal something?
I bought a boat for a lot less than it is worth because the owner is clueless.
Sometimes that happens in private sales.
I think he may be a little senile.
You are a thief.
I got the boat $1000 .
Geez, so cheap.
Yeah, the owner was clueless of the price.
Oh, cos I know this boat worth $5000.
Yeah, if not 6000.
That's good of you though
I got a boat!
Really? I want to go for a ride!
Yeah I got it for a heck of a deal too.
How did you manage that?
The guy had no idea how much it was really worth so I got it way below value.
Lucky duck! You better be taking me out on it!
Are there any community events coming up that you need help with?
There's a charity ball next summer.  We're looking for someone to help plan it.
I'd love to help!
Excellent!  We will meet once a week to work on the details.
I have a lot of availability so that sounds good to me.
Thanks! So great to have your help!
I was so touched when I got that plaque from city hall.
With all you do to help people, it's nice they recognized it.
I don't do it for plaques or trophies, though.
That's okay. You still deserve the recognition.
I guess. It's kind of embarrassing though.
You're too humble. You should congratulate yourself.
I really have enjoyed being a party of the volunteer team!
You have been a amazing help to the local fire department.
I like being able to help and save lives.
You are always available when I call you for anything.
I just like being able to help in my community.
Your are a very big help.
Recently I had some extra free time. So, I decided to help the community.
That's great of you.
I try my best. I'm usually available if the community needs anything.
Wow. You sound like a nice person.
The community means a lot to me.
I bet it does.
I can't go to the party tonight, sorry.
Why what do you have planned instead?
I'm helping out at the local food bank. They are really short of volunteers because everyone's afraid of getting Coronavirus.
Wow that is so great of you. I wish I were more selfless like you are.
Well it's never too late to start. We could really use another person if you're interested.
I'll pass this time. I really want to go to the party. But next time you go let me know and I'll help out for sure.
I'm worried about my job.
What is going on at work?
Business has slowed down due to the virus. The company is reducing the staff.
It's sad that you are loyal to the company and need to worry about your job.
I know, but I could get unemployment. I love my job though.
My company may be doing the same. Everything is a mess right now.
The company wants to cut the size of its staff.
Are you worried that you might lose your job?
A little, but I've always been very loyal to them, so I don't think I will lose my job.
A lot of companies are cutting down on staff.
Yeah, it's frightening.
This is a hard time for everyone.
I gave them my good years for Christ sake.
We don't know who is next on the chopping block.
They will axe me because Susy hates me.
Why does she hate you?
She says I am flirt and that I harass her.
You are going to get fired dude.
My dog Buster hasn't been doing to well this week.
Oh no, what's wrong, is he ok?
I don't know, he was lethargic all week, didn't want to eat much or play at all.
Its bad when a dog doesn't want to eat, I assume you took him to the vet.
Yes, just took him to the vet and they are running some tests to see what's wrong.
I am sure they will figure it out and get Buster back to him old self in no time.
I made a big mistake at work today.
Are you still working as a nurse at the clinic?
Yes, one of my patients died today.
That is terrible news, what happened?
I mixed up the medicine I gave to the patient.
That sounds bad, maybe you shouldn't talk about it because there are probably a lot of legal repercussions.
I can't believe I have done this. I'll never forgive myself
Sasha accidents happen. It's not like you did it on purpose
But it's an accident that cost someone their life. I'm a murderer
You did not do it on purpose, you did not murder him
I've ruined his families life
I'm sure they will forgive you one day
I really wanted to organize the line well.
Yea? Who allowed you to do that?
The teacher did. It was very nice of them.
Yes, that was really nice! It's a fun job.
I definitely understand that. It seemed fun.
Yes, I agree with that.
I have made a decision. I am going to work with my Dad.
Oh, really?  What helped you make that decision?
You know he is rich and powerful, right?  Well, I was talking with him and complaining about how I don't have a job or anything, and he promised that he would use all his money, power, and personal connections to help further my career.
But that sounds like....
Pretty good, right?  And, he asked if he should give me a cushy job at his company that I don't even deserve.  Of course, I said yes!  So, he said that he would, but first, all I have to do is to join with him in his lifelong fight against nepotism in the workplace.  I agreed of course. Now, all I have to do is figure out what nepotism means and he will give me a great job!
Right.  I think that's a great idea.
I've decided to team up with my father!
What have you guys got brewing?
Well, i have a good business idea and he has the cash to help make it happen.
What is the business idea?
A shoe store, something everyone has to have. We just haven't thought of a name yet.
Try to make it something catchy, something that will stick in peoples minds. Something even a little humorous if possible.
I know that my dad and I haven't spoken in a while, but I am going to try to build a relationship.
You want his financial support?
How else am I going to pay for school.
Just don't let him know that's why you started talking to him again.
I know.
So dad what do you say about be joining your company
You finally want to work with your old man?
Yeah, you seem to have everything down
well it wont be easy
i can put in the work
i know you can come in tomorrow
I got a letter from Skyler yesterday and wrote her back.
Where is she?
She's been on vacation for a month touring Europe.
Has she been sending postcards or writing online?
Both but I wanted stamps from the world so she's been sending me letters.
That's a great thing to collect!
My son is really on cloud nine today. He loved his birthday party.
It was a nice party. It was good to see Alex.
It was. I'm glad he came. When he walked in, he gave my son a big hug.
I saw that. I think Alex wanted to keep hugging him.
Hello Alex, thank you for coming!! Need a drink?
Sure, I'll take a diet Coke and some pretzels if you have them.
Billy is in the room with his buddies if you want to say hello.
Hello buddy, come give uncle Alex a hug. I got you that pellet gun you wanted.
Alex!! What the hell are you doing.
It was either that or a Winchester. We need to take baby steps.
Alex is such a sweet girl, isn't she?
yeah she is, she loves kids!
exactly, when she came over for the birthday party she game my son some hugs
that sounds like her, she is great
The birthday party would not have been the same without her
I agree, she makes it better
I got so scared at the dog chasing me
That sounds vicious did you get bit?
No I escaped and climbed over a fence
So glad you are safe
Yeah that dog had no leash
there needs to be lease laws
I took a test last Monday.
How did you do on it?
I did pretty good.
What kind of grade did your teacher give you?
They gave me a good grade.
Congratulations. I hope all your other tests are as easy for you.
I got my algebra test back today.
How did you do on it?
I did awesome! A+!
See? I knew all that studying would pay off! Great job!
Thanks! If it weren't for you I would have failed. Thank you so much for helping me learn the material.
You’re welcome!
I really put Carson in the car even if he don't want to.
Why did you do that Casey?
Well, Carson really need to see the doctor even if he resist.
Ohh, I see, just be careful on your way to the hospital.
Yes, we will.
Take Care both of you.
I gave Carson a ton of junk food yesterday and feel guilty about it.
I thought you were totally against giving your son junk food.
I know, but he was putting up such a fight about going to the doctor, and I had to pin him to the car to get to his appointment.
That sounds so painful.
I know. So as a treat, I gave Carson a lot of ice cream and chips.
Well, at least the doctor's appointment is over.
Come on, fighting it isn't going to do any good.
But I hate going to the doctor!
Am I going to have to pick you up and put you in the car myself?
Put me down!
There, all buckled in and ready to go.
This just isn't fair!
I finally asked Riley if she'd go to the prom with me.
That's great! So what did she say?
She said yes but now I'm really getting nervous because I don't know how to dance.
I'll show you how...don't worry about that.
I didn't know you knew how to dance. That would be terrific. I've been wanting to date Riley for a long time.
Say no more. We'll start tonight if you don't have plans.
I'm so excited for my date tonight.
Are you getting ready?
I finished my shower, and I picked out my best outfit.
You must be really trying to impress.
I really like this girl.
Good luck on your date!
My mom bought me new mittens today. I am not happy about it either!
Why not?
I like gloves, not mittens.
Why? Both keep your hands warm.
With gloves, you can use your fingers better. Mittens are not as easy to wear when you need your fingers.
Ok, I can understand that. Explain that to your mom and see if she will get you gloves instead.
I really despise these mittens!
Austin, your mom really cares about you and wants you to keep warm.
But I hate mittens! She knows how much I hate to wear mittens.
Maybe you can just hide them in your book bag when you go to school.
No way! She'll know. She will inspect them for signs of wear.
Then, you better wear them Austin.
I hate wearing mittens.
Well, you have to when it gets too cold.
I know. My mother bought me a new pair and wants me to use them.
You should because it is freezing outside.
I really hate it.
Mothers know best.
Can you believe I have to wear these mittens?
You don't sound too happy about it.
My mom bought them for me and I'd feel bad if I never put them on.
I guess you're stuck with the mittens then.
So, I'm making burgers and hot dogs for the barbeque.
Sounds good! Need any help?
Yeah, can you chop these vegetables? Holy cow, my stomach is grumbling. I haven't eaten all day!
Me, either. I can't wait to eat something.
These burgers smell so good.
Yeah, my stomach is growling even more.
I nearly passed out before the barbeque yesterday.
Was it from the heat, it was so bad yesterday.
No, I had been up since dawn preparing for it, getting the lawn game ready, setting up the tables cleaning the grill.
I bet you didn't eat or drink anything either like usual.
Nope, totally forgot until I was making the hamburger patties and I actually heard my stomach growl and I realized that's why i was feeling light headed and cranky.
That would do it, we need to set an alarm for you so you remember to eat while you work on projects.
When I was getting ready for the barbeque the other day my stomach would not stop growling!
I hate when that happens. It is like you can't even wait another minute to eat!
That is exactly how I felt and I was making the tastiest looking hamburger patties so it was awful!
How did they taste once you got them all cooked up?
So good! It was one of my best meals yet!
I could really go for a burger now too after hearing you talk about it!
I wish that I had more friends, but it is so hard for me to talk to people.
I remember when we first met it seemed like it took me weeks to get you to talk to me.
Yeah, I just get so nervous and afraid to talk to others.
You are a great person though. I think you should try to put yourself out there more.
I just don't think being outgoing is in my nature.
I know, but others are really missing out on having you as a friend by you being so quiet!
I hate school so much.
Why don't you like school bailey?
I never have fun. I'd much rather be at home.
Well why don't you try to make more friends?
The people at my school are boring. They never like me.
Making friends can take a long time Bailey.
I hate being the new kid at school, I have made hardly any friends.
You have me though.
Yeah, but you are just one person.
One friend is all you really need.
I just feel like a loser because I don't have a group.
Don't feel badly about that, really.
I really feel like I can express my values through the new show I'm producing.
What values are you trying to express?
Well, the theme of the show is love, and I think that's the most important thing in the world.
That sounds like a refreshingly different theme for a show.
Yes, I'm really able to convey a lot of beautiful thoughts and ideas to my audience.
I'll have to watch your show one of these days to check it out.
Did we get the newspaper today yet?
Yes, it just came, and I have the paper opened to the critics reviews.
What does it say?  What does it say about my performance?
It says... Uh... Maybe you don't need to see that right now...
Give me that!  Let's see, it says...Amateurish?  ...Overly volatile? ...Sloppy?  How can they say such things?  I was marvellous!  With love as my theme, I delivered a most passionate portrayal of abiding emotive sentiment, embodied in the very essence of dramatic flare as to be suitable for royalty!  How could I not evoke critical acclaim and words of great affection from the crowd?
Well, it says that you spat on the crowd with every line.  You really should work on that lisp my dear.
I went to the store and decided to get a soda from the machine out front and there was this guy standing there rummaging through his pockets.
So was he cute? Did he hit on  you?
No, no that's not the point. I got my can of soda and took a drink then I noticed the guy just staring at the can of soda.
Was he some kind of weirdo?
No, just really thirsty and broke so I took a couple drinks of soda and gave him the rest.
I thought it would be more exciting than that.
I saw this guy who looked really thirsty and gave him my soda.
Was he a homeless person?
Yeah he did not want money he wanted something to drink.
It is almost 100 degrees outside.
Yeah i just felt really bad for him.
Well that was a really generous thing you did.
Some guy was running and breathing very hard so I let him have some of my soda.
You shared a soda with a stranger.
He looked really thirsty and I'd rather him drink my soda than pass out.
What a good Samaritan.
You look hot and thirsty.
Yeah, I've been out in the sun without anything to drink.
Do you want to share my soda?
Are you sure? I don't want you to run out of fluids.
Definitely, I have plenty and it's ice cold.
Thanks a lot! I feel so much better now I've had a drink.
I don't know what came over me. I just yelled for no reason.
What happened?
They were being perfectly fine, but I was upset by what the principal had told me.
So what are you going to do?
I'm going to apologize to the students first thing tomorrow and tell them what happened.
I think that's a great idea. They will understand.
I don't want to wake anyone.
Ok.
I'm turning the lights away from the house.
Smart idea.
I have to turn the lights way from the house.
Why are you doing that?
I don't want to wake anybody inside it.
Don't we need to film the scene towards that direction?
We can put the light closer to the subjects.
I think that will work.
Dude, If the lights hit the house we're screwed.
Man don't worry they are sleeping.
I know it is hard to see but I need to hide the light.
Damn man I can't see anything.
Just stay behind me and be quiet.
Ok, just don't let me run into anything.
I think it's about my time that I can play with the toy
you had it for over an hour yesterday and I never played with it
yeah, but you're ugly and I don't like you
that really hurts my feelings and I am telling mom when she gets home
I don't like Quinn anymore.
What happened?
Quinn always picks the dump truck to play with and I never get a turn.
You get to play with the dump truck all day, when Quinn isn't here.
I want to play with the dump truck while Quinn is here.
I think you should try harder to be friendly towards Quinn, you have always been good friends.
I can't believe it.
What's wrong?
Me and Quinn got in a fight over a silly toy and I hurt her feelings.
What did you do now?
I told her I can't stand her.
Wow.
I might have told Quinn something that hurt her so bad
what was all that about Remy?
We were fighting over a toy that dad bought for us and I got angry
Quinn is younger than you man! You should have let her have it
come to think of it, I should have but I told her no one likes her not even me.
You have to apologize to her
I'm really saving a lot of money doing this tutoring job for the last two years.
What are you saving it for.
I have to pay my college education with it.
Your family isn't helping you pay for that?
No. But at least it's really teaching me to depend on myself.
Can you tutor me on how to do that for myself?
I've found a great way to earn extra money for college is to tutor a few evenings a week and on Saturdays.
What do you tutor?
Mostly high school math, algebra and geometry specifically.
Does it pay well?
Definitely.  I charge $25 an hour and I can easily make $300 or $400 a week.
I should give that a try.  But not math!  History or English would be better subjects for me to tutor.
I had an awful day today.
Why was your day awful?
Just a stressful day at work, I cried a lot.
Are you still crying?
No, when work ended I felt a lot better.
It's good to let your emotions out sometimes.
Sorry for getting all worked up before. I was just so upset...
That's okay. I've never seen you cry like that.
Yeah, I've been pretty emotional lately. Before I know it, I'm in tears.
I understand. Sometimes life can be too tough to handle.
Sure can. It helps to let it out. I always feel better afterwards.
You're doing the right thing. Keeping it bottled up inside is very bad for you.
I wrecked my car last week and I have never been so upset in my life.
What are you going to do for a car now?
I don't know. I cried so much over it because I spent so much time fixing that car up.
I know you did, but maybe it can be repaired.
I am holding out hope it could be, but it was pretty mangled.
If there is anything I can do to help please let me know!
I am finally going to get an A on a test. I have been studying so hard for the class. I don't want to fail anymore.
That's great. Do you feel more comfortable with the material now?
Yes, I think I understand it. It took a bunch of hours and tears, but I've got the hang of it.
Well I'm glad you are not failing anymore. You are going to be a great student now.
It might’ve taken me months but finally I have it done.
You really broke through to the student you've been talking about?
Yep, I was able to break through to them.
That should be commended.
Put me in for an award then.
The presidential medal of freedom begets you.
I feel so much better about myself after improving academically.
You worked really hard Lee and it shows.
I was failing miserably and now I am excelling.
You certainly are! That's a lot to be proud of.
Thank you! And it only gets better from here.
That's remarkable!
I had the chance to be a diplomat today.
Can you tell me what happened?
The others spent the afternoon insulting me.
So you turned the other cheek?
I hit them in the face.
You decided not to be a diplomat.
That cake was so good! I really shouldn't have had that third piece!
You're right, you are getting kind of fat
Really? SMACK
OW why did you smack me in the face?
You called me fat, what an insult! Jerk, you're lucky I didn't do more than that!
Geesh sorry, I didn't mean to insult you, that might have come out wrong
I am so sick and tired of others treating me like crap!
Who is being a jerk to you now?
Everyone! I got so angry at them that I punched them in their faces!
That seems really extreme! Aren't you worried about getting in trouble?
No I'm not because I don't care if I do.
It sounds like you are still really mad. Maybe you should calm down and then think about it.
I went to a party the other night.
Did you know anyone who was there?
Yes.  I brought some of my friends with me.
Did you get all dressed up?
Yes.  I made sure all my girlfriends looked nice.
You're a good friend.
So which shirt do you think I should ear to the party tonight?
I like them both honestly
Well, the blue one goes with these pants a bit better than the green one
Yes, that's true. But you can't go wrong with either really
I guess I'll wear the blue one
Good choice. That looks nice
I went to a party the other night.
Did you go with your friends?
Yeah, they were kind of annoyed with my because I picked out their outfits for them.
Did you want them to look good at the party?
Yes! I just know fashion better then they do.
I mean, I feel like you were being considerate.
I felt like a mother today dressing everybody for the party.
You did a great job as everybody look nice.
It took way too long to get everybody in an outfit that look good on them.
People are extremely picky with clothes these days.
I had no idea they were so bad.
I'm sure you're not going to be volunteering for this anytime soon.
I closed an hour early so I could get to the concert on time.
You should make it. Hopefully you won't run into traffic.
Yeah. I was so glad we didn't get a mad rush at the bakery just before closing.
Yeah. You know tons of people like to stop in for your bread to go with their dinner.
Well not tonight. I deserve to have an early evening every now and then.
Of course you do. You give that bakery your blood, sweat and tears.
Kai, I'll show you how to bait the hook and then you can do it the next time.
I've never even been fishing before so I don't know how to do any of it.
Baiting the hook is the easiest part. I'll show you how to cast, too.
I thought fishing was supposed to be fun.
It is once you learn a few things.
Okay, I'm waiting for the fun to begin.
Hey Kai, why don't you bait that hook for me?
Umm, actually I have never been fishing before so I don't know how.
Oh ok, just hand it to me and I'll show you.
Wow, thanks Remy!
No problem at all!
Do you know how to bait the hook?
No, this is my first time fishing. Looks hard to bait it.
It's easy I'll do it for you right now just watch me so you can learn.
Thank you so much and I will remember every detail.
Here you go it is all done.
That isn't that hard I should be able to do that next time.
It was fun fishing with Kai, but he didn't know anything about fishing.
Was that his first time fishing?
Yeah, He had never gone fishing before.
Was it difficult fishing with him?
Not really. But I did have to do simple stuff like baiting his hook for him.
Well, at least it seems like you guys caught a lot of fish.
The trade show was kind of a bust. Attendance was way, way down.
You must have expected that, given what's going on with people being on lockdown everywhere.
Well, I figured there would be some impact, but this was worse than I expected.
That's too bad. I'm sure next year things will be back to normal. Or close, at least.
Hopefully. Plus I basically wasted good money on plane tickets to get there and back.
That's so frustrating. You should check with your CPA to see if those are deductible.
Quinn is old enough to be my dad and has been like a father to me.
Quinn? I thought he was your father!
Nope, Quinn is my older brother and got really involved with my sports stuff and boy scouts when my real dad left home.
Hey man, I am really sorry!
Oh I am good because my real dad was a jerk and things go better when he left.
Okay, cool. Well, you have a great family and Quinn is a good dude.
I really need a girlfriend!
Why so soon? Give yourself some time. You dated your last girlfriend for years.
I know. I got so used to having a girlfriend for so long.
I know. It is tough, but give yourself time.
I am just so tired of being alone already.
You will get used to it with time. Or maybe you will meet someone before then.
I bought Remy a delicious cake for his birthday.
He must have been thrilled about that. Everybody loves cake!
I spent an hour at the supermarket looking for the best one.
I don't think I've ever tried a cake I didn't like, but it's sweet that you wanted the cake to be perfect for Remy.
Just went to the supermarket.
What did you get there?
I needed to get a cake for Remy.
Is it her birthday?
Yes, it's her birthday--I got her the best cake.
You're such a good friend!
I had to go to 3 markets to find her the right cake.
Did she like the chocolate moose?
She loved it! She cried when I gave it.
How sweet of you.
Hey Remy, guess what I got you?
What? Tell me!
I got you a birthday cake! Happy birthday!
Wow, this is awesome, thanks Lee!
You're welcome buddy!
I need to avoid Kendall for a while. She's looking for me.
Why do you want to avoid Kendall? Do you owe her money?
No worse. I went out with her girlfriend Cara last night.
You did what? Why would you do that? You and Kendall are friends.
I know, but Cara is so hot I couldn't help myself. And now I'm in big trouble.
You sure are. Well if she asks I'll say I haven't heard from you. But eventually you're going to have to face her.
Can you let me know if you see any headlights pull into the drive-way?
Yeah, why?
Last week I took Rebecca, Kendall's girlfriend out on a date but then Kendall found out and now he's looking for me.
Why did you take Rebecca out when you knew she had a boyfriend?
I didn't know. She told me they broke up. Not until the day after did I learn they were still together, when I was also told Kendall was looking for me.
Oh, man. I heard Kendall talking about beating up a kid that hit on his girl. I didn't realize it was you.
I spent the entire day shut in and watching tv. It was a waste of a day off.
So you did nothing on your day off?
Yea, it snowed hard so that I couldn't do anything outside.
Did you watch anything good at least?
No, but I did learn to love jeopardy.
Aside from shovelling snow yesterday it was a good day!
I spent all afternoon clearing snow after work.
I got the day off so I watched movies..
Lucky! I never get the day off for snow.
I usually don't so I was surprised to see my job called it off, but it was pretty bad out.
It was. My drive home was horrible.
I love it when it snows.
You must be in love because it snowed yesterday.
I am happy as anyone can be because I got the day off from work.
Did you do anything constructive with your free time?
I spent the time watching a movie.
That explains all the snow piled up in your driveway.
What did you do yesterday?
Since it was snowing, I slept in. You?
I got the day off due to the snow. So, I watched a movie.
What movie did you watch?
IP man 3.
I've seen it. Great movie.
My mom, Ash, gave me grief for making bad grades this semester.
How bad where your grades?
I failed Calculus so I'll have to retake it next semester.
Why did you fail it?
I started hanging out with the wrong crowded. I ditched too many classes to do drugs.
You need to pull yourself together.
I went into it and decided I was just going to go big and try to win as much as possible.
Wow! Weren't you nervous you could lose all your money?
Yeah, but I figured I had to just go for it. I was desperate and needed the money.
What were you going to do if you lost?
I hadn't thought that far, I put it all in on lucky seven and it paid off I won!
Wow! That is amazing. I don't know if I could take such a big risk!
I won big bucks!
Was this down at the casino in Austin?
Yeah I rolled the dice and hit a seven
what does that mean?
I won the jackpot!
Super! You deserve it
I'm glad I took a risk and rolled the dice.
Don't tell me you end up winning.
I won up a lot of money because I took Austin chances.
That is amazing, we should celebrate.
I am buying, we should celebrate indeed.
Ok, great and you should tell me more about it!
I'm sure Austin is happy that I was able to bring good luck.
I need to bring you to the casino with me as well.
I'm going to start charging people a fee.
As long as you're winning jackpots, people will have no issues with fees.
That's a good point.
So when are you going to the casino next?
It's true what they say.
What do they say?
You got to take chance to make money. I rolled the dice, hit a 7, and won a load of cash.
Wow, you got so lucky.
What was that kiss for?
Just to show I love you
I love you too Sydney
Thanks for being in my life
stop it you're going to make me blush
and I love that about you too
I made the squad today!
Oh wow! That's such good news. When was the try out?
it was today. They told us right away.
You worked so hard for that. I'm so happy for you.
I really put a lot of work into practice but it paid off.
Congratulations!
I made the basketball team today.
That's awesome. You really worked hard.
I practiced most of my summer. Every day of the week for at least 4 hours.
You really earned that spot on the squad.
Thank you for saying so. It was a lot of work.
But the hard work paid off.
I've been practicing my moves a lot for the past month.  I practiced every day.  I tried out for the team and made the squad.
What did you try out for?
I wanted to be on the cheerleading team with my friend Chelsea.
That's great news.  All that practice paid off.
It helped that Chelsea was on the team. She taught me a few of their routines.
You guys are going to have so much fun.  I'll come watch you cheer at the games.
I'm so glad that I made the basketball team.
Were the try-outs hard?
Yes, they were very hard. But I had been practicing a lot so I was prepared for everything.
Do you think you will play a lot this year?
I hope so, I really spent a lot of time practicing over the summer.
I'm sure all that practice and hard work will pay off!
Ugh, Jordan won't leave me alone!
Why not? What happened?
We got in a fight a couple of days ago, and I ignored him all day yesterday.
That was mean of you! You should try and communicate better.
I know. But I was so mad that I was afraid I'd say something really mean, so I just tried to ignore him.
I guess that makes sense. Maybe you should tell him that.
I'm so glad I made it home in one piece!
What happened to you? Must have been a wild night.
My car broke down, my cell phone died. I was in the middle of nowhere and slept in my car.
Scary! You could have been robbed.
My car got towed this morning. Thankful I have my bed to sleep in right now.
Stick one of those portable chargers in your car next time so you can charge your phone.
I am so exhausted.
Why are you so tired?
I just got back from my trip.
I am glad you made it safe and sound.
Me too. I can't wait to sleep in my actual bed.
Well, enjoy your rest.
Can you believe that Alex got intoxicated and made a fool out of himself?
Yes, and it's not the first time either.
I had to drive him home after the party and he was acting so foolishly.
Maybe you shouldn't accept his invitation to anymore parties.
I agree, that is the last time that I will be seen publicly with Alex.
That's the right attitude!
I just gave Alex a ride home from the dance because he was too drunk.
Well, that's nice of you.
Yeah, but I dented the car.
Well, that's too bad. Hopefully the damage isn't too bad to your car.
I used his car.
Maybe he's too drunk to remember who drove him home.
The party last night was wild.
Oh yeah, are you hungover today?
No, I decided not to drink at all.
Oh yeah?  Were you the designated driver?
Yes, in fact I ended up driving Alex home because he was too drunk to drive.
That's good, I'm glad everyone stayed safe.
I am so happy that u scored a goal finally
I am happy for you too
I work so hard i practiced for months
All your hard work paid off
At list I will not be the worst player of the team any more
I am glad
I can't believe it I scored a goal yesterday for my team, and I'm the worst person on the team
that is great, how did you get away from being the worst?
I practiced by myself for months to get better
I bet that felt great to be able to make a goal for your team
it was great and made me feel like I was doing something besides being there
that is true you put in your effort for the team
Seriously, you can't begin to know how good it felt to finally hit a goal yesterday.
Kendall, you totally deserved that moment! You've been working so hard, for months now.
I couldn't have done it without you.
No problem. I had a lot of practicing with you all this time. It was really great seeing you improve and gain that confidence you needed.
You're such a good friend. I should have dedicated that goal to you.
I think that would have started a really weird precedent. How about instead you just buy me a margarita?
All the practice finally paid off, I scored a goal for the team yesterday.
Not to say anything, but you were the worst player on the team when you started.
Thanks for showing me support jerk!
I told you that if you kept practicing, you would get better.
Yeah you did.
It had been so long since I saw Quinn.
I know, it's been over three months now?
Yes, if not longer. When I saw him come off the bus I ran right to him.
That's really sweet.
I couldn't help but wrap my arms around him and hold him close. We were both smiling and holding back tears.
That's great to hear, Addison
Quinn, you are one of my closest friends.
You are mine as well, Addison, after knowing you all my life.
Come here and let me hug you before we go home.
Of course, thanks for hanging out today and checking out my new car.
Anytime, I'll be back up your way next week so we can grab dinner.
That sounds great, Addison, and looking forward to next week!
I picked up the wrong size shoes when I went to the mall.
You can exchange them?
No, I was out of town when I pick them up and won’t be heading back there anytime soon.
What did you do with them?
I put them on eBay and was able to sell them pretty fast.
Did you at least get your money back?
So the shoes I bought from the sale didn't even fit
Did you exchange them for the right size?
It was a final sale, no exchanges, so I sold them on eBay for half the price I paid
Well at least you got a little money back for them
Yes true, I'd rather have the shoes they were perfect otherwise
You'll have to start searching again and be more mindful of the size issue
I posted a bunch of shoes on eBay if you want to take a look.
Why did you do that?
I bought some new shoes and they were all the wrong size!
I hate when that happens. How do I look at your eBay store.
I'll send you an email with the link.
OK, cool. I'll check my email when I get home.
I had so much fun hiking yesterday.
Who did you go with?
Skylar and I picked a hiking trail together and met near the canyon edge.
Was the trail long?
It took up about 10 miles to complete the whole trail.
Wow, you must've been exhausted!
We met near the canyon edge to begin our hike.
You went the long way.
Where else could we have met to start the trail?
You could have met Skylar around on the other side by the bike rack.
I thought that was the exit area. There are always so many people hanging out there.
Nope. You can start there too.
I told Sydney to meet me near the canyon edge after we finally decided on a hiking trail.
Where did you guys hike?
We went up the trail near the canyon edge, the one that goes up to the waterfall, and went all the way up.
I haven't been on that trail, but I heard it has a magnificent view.
The view from the top is breathtakingly.  We saw the whole city and skyline.
I need to hike up there soon.
This view of the canyon is so amazing don't you think?
I love it, it is such a nice day today.
When do you want to get back on the trail?
I think we can hang out here for a while just to cool down.
I agree, the view is just too nice to leave so soon.
We should take some pictures together up here.
I have spent so much time trying to solve that issue with the machine at work and I finally got it!
That's great news. How did you do it?
I spent a lot of time trying to read algorithms until I came up with something.
I can't believe you finally solved it after so many people couldn't.
I know I am pretty impressed with myself after all those hours of work.
I am sure your boss is also!
Ah that was the problem
You figured it out
yes, I had the decimal in the wrong place
Oh yes,  I've done that before
this time the formula should work perfectly
great, well done, that was a difficult one
I grabbed Ash and ran towards the house this morning.
What happened?
There was a venomous snake hissing at her.
Oh no! Is she okay? Did she get bit?
No, she's fine. After I rescued her, I got rid of the snake.
Oh thank goodness, I am happy it ends well.
Ash nearly go bitten by a venonous snake.  She was distracted listening to music on her phone.  I pushed Ash to the side to avoid her stepping on it.
A least someone was paying attention.
She got mad at me initially until I told her to look down on the floor. The snake was slithering her way.  She freaked out and ran.
You saved her from a potentially deadly bite.
I did.  She thanked me later for it and treated me to ice cream.
That's sweet.
I'm here Alex, where did he hit you?
in my arm, is it bad?
its not as bad as I thought, that was that unfriendly policeman?
it was, he threatened me and even you
for what?
he saw me dealing in the area, and think we belong to the gang
I'm so glad I bought as many tickets as I did.
How many tickets did you buy?
I bought one hundred of them.
That a lot of tickets, how did you pay for them.
I used some leftover cash I had from a sale.
I'm just glad you won the raffle.
I'm finally cancer free!
That's incredible, I'm so happy for you!
What a relief that all my therapy has paid off.
Yeah, you sure had it rough for a while.
The chemo was awful but I know one thing for sure, I'm going to keep living a healthy lifestyle the rest of my life.
That's a good idea.
There is a lot of stuff in the eyes of me and I think riley is one of those things
Yes,  she is truly and amazing girl,  isn't she
she most definitely is.  I can't imagine myself being with someone else
yes there is a great way to escalate your friend ships without having to worry about losing it
My feeling for her are huge and I want to show it
of course you do
I only have this chance, and I have to take it now.
As they say, you only live once.
What is the worst that can happen?
Do you really want me to answer that?
No, it's a rhetorical question.
That's what I thought.
I finally realized who I really like
oh, tell me more!
I finally saw Riley for who he is. He is the one for me
When did you figure this out?
Last week after the party, I saw how nice he had been to me over years of friendship and I want to see what it could turn into.
you should ask him out and see what he says!
Thanks for meeting up with me. I'm trying to find new friends.
No problem! You just moved here right?
Yep, just a couple weeks ago.
Do you like it so far?
I really do! I just need to find some friends.
Well, that's why I am here!
I don't like this house. I'm not sure why we're going to the door.
Just relax. Show the ghosts you're not a threat. Keep your hands down.
Ghosts! You said this place wasn't haunted.
Just keep your eyes open for any movement.
Why? You said nothing was here.
Just in case. Quit freaking out.
I was expecting someone from the 911 call to come out and greet us but it was eerily silent.
What did you do?
I approached the house cautiously because I heard no noise.
I am glad I don't do your job, I would be scared out of my mind.
It was so quiet I could hear a pin drop, and there was no one home.
So the call was a fake? Or they heard ghosts or something inside.
I got really spooked tonight. I was walking home and I just felt like I was being watch.
That's a creepy feeling. I hate that.
I know. I was just feeling all tingly like someone was watching or something. So I put my hands down at my side.
What does putting your hands down at your side do.
It keeps my hands ready for anything that might happen. Someone popping out of the woodwork or something.
You don't understand how much I miss the beach.
I understand, and was shocked when you made the move.
Money talks these days.
What all did you do at the shore?
Not much, I just wanted to soak up the sun and lay around in the sand.
Do you want to catch up sometime while you're here?
It's so wonderful to be at the beach!
I couldn't agree more. When was the last time you were here?
It's been at least five years - way too long!
I don't think I could stay away from the sand and the surf for five years.
I am so happy to be back in the sun!
Amen, sister! Let's get into the water!
So the kids have started to act up.
Yes, I am not sure what I should we do?
I put rules into effect so they should not get out of control.
Yes, I would hate for it to get out of control. It would not be productive.
I agree. That's why I presented them with the rules. It's been working.
That's good to hear.
I've decided to put some rules into effect for my children.
Why are you doing that?
I don't want them to get out of control.
Do you think you implemented them early enough?
I think I put them into effect before things got too out of hand.
Time will tell I guess.
I'm always so embarrassed when I laugh.
You were cracking up just an hour ago!
Yeah, but I hid my face in my sleeve so nobody would see.
Why are you so insecure about laughing in front of people?
I don't know. It's just a part of my personality.
I was laughing so hard because the preacher was making this weird noise and I was trying to hide myself so no one would get mad at me.
What noise was he making?
There was some gurgling noise coming from his stomach and I heard it because I sat in the front row.
That is kind of funny, did he look like he needed to use the bathroom?
No but now that you say that it makes it even funnier to me.
I wish I was there to see this with you.
My boss was at the office party and he was so drunk!  He was really making a fool of himself and I was actually quite embarrassed for him!
I couldn't make it to the party, tell me what happened!
Well, my boss was drunk like I said, so he got on the stage and took the microphone and tried to sing some old Bon Jovi song, with no background music, and he didn't know hardly any of the words, it was so embarrassing.
Oh wow, what did you do?  Did you try to hide how ashamed you were for your boss?
Yes, I was laughing so hard I was crying, and I had to hide my face in my sleeve so nobody could tell!
Oh, man.  I don't think I could have made it through such a lame party as that.  Next time, you should just skip the office party and come to the party at my house!
I needed dinner but didn't not have time to eat a full meal so I threw a hot pocket into the microwave.
That's what I do when I am on the go.
It's just something for me to snack on.
Sometimes I grab a granola bar.
Me too.  I keep some everywhere.
It's how you can keep going all the time.
I am so hungry right now.
What are in the mood for eating?
Honestly I don't even feel like cooking right now.
You can always heat up one of those hot pockets.
Oh yeah! I had forgotten about those. I will heat one up now.
Does it taste good?
I was not keen that I had to eat a hot pocket last night
You've been working too hard this week.
This project is going to be the end of me.
Just a few more days to go and it'll be over.
Then I can actually sit down and have a meal.
Maybe we can do it together?
Thank you for coming to our wedding!
Oh my gosh, of course I came! I wouldn't miss it. How did it feel?
Amazing. While I was walking down the aisle I could see Lee focused on me the whole time trying not to cry.
Well that didn't work, did it?
No, not for either of us.
I also got a little teary during the ceremony.
She looks so beautiful in that wedding dress
you got so lucky finding such a nice girl to marry you
I guess I was at the right time right place as they say
It is amazing, how things work out like that sometimes
Robin slowed dance with me and kissed me on the lips.
How do you feel about that?
I think she likes me.
I know she likes you. She tells me that all the time.
Are you spilling her secrets?
That's not a secret.
You know as much as I love basketball, I've always had a weak spot.
Right, I know. You've never been able to dribble well.
Nope, I never have. Which really sucks considering it's my favorite sport.
I'm sensing that something has changed.
It's the concentration exercises I've been doing. They're really working. Now I'm actually focused on the ball and suddenly I can dribble.
What an accomplishment! Now nothing can stop you on the basketball court!
I finally got to play in a basketball game.
Did you do anything spectacular?
No, I was so nervous, I was concentrating so hard on dribbling the ball across the court.
You'll be less nervous as you play more.
The crowd at my last basketball game was really loud.
Yeah, everyone was really excited to see us go up against Central High.
It was pretty distracting.
It didn't stop you from making the winning basket, though.
Yeah, I had to concentrate really hard while I was dribbling the ball across the court.
It paid off! Everyone went wild when you made the basket.
I've never felt so focused during a game before!
You did a great job. I watched the whole thing from the front row.
I just kept concentrating on dribbling the ball, and before I knew it we were ahead by 20 points.
Your basketball team is going to the final this year for sure, and it's all thanks to you.
I have to take a bus to go visit my family.
I am not keen on public transportation.
I know, but it's the cheapest way I can go see them.
I understand. All the best on your trip.
I have gain so much weight! I need to go do some emergency cardio!
Wow, Quinn, calm down. You look alright!
I am in my heart! I just ate the last piece of the most unhealthy cake ever!
Oh, Quinn, relax. It's not the end of the world. Really, stress makes people fatter than cake!
I felt so guilty today.
What did you do that made you feel that way?
I ate the last piece of cake at the party.
I'm sure that cake was meant for guests like you to enjoy.
Yeah, but I had at least 4 pieces.
That sounds like something I would do. I love cake.
I think I've finally opened my mind to learning from all avenues.
What have you been learning from?
Besides school, I've been reading books and taking self-paced courses online. Then just applying everything to the real world.
It's great that you can learn and apply so seamlessly.
It's necessary if you want to be successful with it.
I am learning constantly in school and everywhere. I read every book I can get my hands on.  I take self-paced courses online.  I practice real-world skills by volunteering.
You just love learning.
Learning excited me.  I feel more capable whenever I learned something.
You are enriching your young mind.
I know some kids get bored but I don't get bored because I always have a book with me.
You don't waste your time on video games.
I've been learning so much lately that I'm almost bursting with knowledge.
Is it just from school?
No, I'm also taking online courses, reading books and trying to learn real-world skills.
Wow, you've really been burning the candle at both ends, as they say. You're becoming very wise.
I'm really learning a lot at school.
You seem to be working hard.
I've been taking self-paced courses online, reading books, and practicing real-world skills as well.
Wow, that is great.
Thank you. I hope that it helps prepare me for a great job.
I think you have a bright future.
I feel like I am really ready to go out into the world on my own.
Do you think you know enough real-world skills though?
I actually do. I have taken so many different courses at school and read so many books it has really prepared me.
What sort of courses did you take?
A lot of self-paced ones and plus I make sure I read in my free time.
It does sound like you have built a solid foundation.
I was so bored I ended up just watching a movie on the couch
what did you watch?
an old 80s action flick
I haven't seen one in so long
It brought back memories I missed
let's go see one together soon
I can't believe you had to deal with that. I think you definitely deserved it
yeah your right.  You're a terrible person for assuming that though
yeah but you have hurt me too in the past with some of your outrageous actions
you're right.  I guess this is one thing that I derserved
You think so?  I for sure think so
I know Quinn.  I have had it coming
Should I take this offer from Remy?
What's the offer?
If I race Remy in the yard he'll give me an advantage.
Just a race, you don't have to win?
I have to win.
You should race him.
It won't be fair,  because  you are a running star.
I'll give you a head start.
You are still going to beat me.
How about we race in the yard so you will have an advantage?
That works!
Okay let's get this set up!
I was playing a game with Kendall in the yard and I thought I would win.
I don't know Remy is kind of competitive she would have to let you win to beat her.
Well she said she give me an advantage so I'd at least have some chance of wining.
So did you win even with the advantage Remy gave you?
No I didn't Remy is still faster than me and I lost by a lot.
I would have loved to see that race!
I am so happy to be studying, I am really enjoying it!
That's great, tell me, how things are going?
My floormate Skylar is awesome, she makes me feel welcome
So happy to hear thus, being far from home could be difficult, is nice to have someone making you feel like home.
Totally, I love it.
Glad to hear Skylar is doing a great job.
Did I tell you that I'm hosting a foreign exchange student?
No you haven't told me; what is their name?
Her name is Skylar and she's from Sweden. I like her a lot.
Did she like staying with your family?
I think so, she said that I made her feel at home.
I'm glad you gave her a good impression of us Americans!
So I hosted a foreign exchange student last month.
Really? What country were they from?
They were from Germany.
That is so neat.
Yeah, I tried to be as best of a host as possible. You know I know German too,  so that helped.
That is great that you knew their language.
Who is the new person in class today?
That's Skylar, she is the new foreign exchange student.
Oh, wow, I think I am going to go over and talk to her.
What are you going to talk to her about?
I think I will invite her to come sit with us at lunch if she needs a place to sit.
Oh, that's very good of you to welcome her like that.
Have you ever had your hands checked at work?
No, why would they do that?
at my job we have to get them checked before going into the kitchen
is that because you will be cooking?
Yes, I believe that's what it is for
that makes sense I guess
Inspection seemed to get a bit odd every time we need to cook everyday
I guess it's to make sure that we all wash our hands since the customers have complained
Sometimes I wonder if they just lie for free food though
It's always the same people too and the managers  just keep letting them eat for free
It took a long time but we were finally able to win this war.
Hasn't this been going on for a year?
Yup, it's been about a year.
How many lawyers have you gone through?
We have gone through three of them.
I'm just glad that you're done with this.
We fought so hard and I'm glad that it was over
At least we can tell our children stories about being brave and fighting our battles
It is sad that we have to fight some wars over misunderstandings that people cant solve
I wish people could figure things out before it comes to such desperate measures
I guess some things are inevitable
I'm so happy Aubrey and I managed to win the war.
How did you guys end up winning?
I fought Aubrey's way instead of my own.
Do you think that helped you guys win?
Yes, that was a key reason. I believe it really gave us an advantage by being on the same page.
Great! I'm so happy for you guys.
I nearly died over the weekend.
That's really frightening. What happened?
My friends and I went to the game park. We were attacked by a lion.
How did you escape?
At first, we climbed a tree forgetting that it would climb.
Did the lion follow you up the tree?
We climbed that tree thinking we could get away from the lion but it started to climb the tree too.
Oh my god, what happened next?
There as a local man who worked with the lions following us in a jeep and he got the lion off the tree and scared it away.
I cannot believe you got yourself into that situation man.
I can't either, it was such a stupid thing to do trying to tick off a lion.
Luckily you got out of it without getting seriously hurt or killed.
I almost lost a lot of money today
were you in Las Vegas gambling again?
yes, I was and I almost lost all my husband's savings on the roulette table
I think you really need to seek some help
Yeah I think so too, I feel really scared though
you will get through this, talk to your husband and ask for help
I got so mad, I couldn't contain it anymore
Did you huff off?
I did, I flared up into anger
You need to calm down, it's just a video game
I know, I should not let it get to me like this.
blow off some steam and come back
I was so devastated after the defeat.
You should have put more effort into it!
yes, I know! I left in a huff of rage after I was beaten in the video game competition.
You need to buckle up next time!
I know, I will.
I was so upset that I lost yesterday.
What did you play?
It was a video game competition.
Who did you play against?
They were players form the town next to us.
That happened sometimes. Better luck next time.
Remember when I was playing with the guys while you were leaving?
Did you break something?
Yeah, the boys tackled me and we broke the door. So I called my mom and told her.
What did she say?
She was really mad and told me to call the repair man.
Well at least you aren't grounded, yet.
I think that Taylor is mad at me.
Did you guys get into an argument?
Yeah, she shut the door on me.
You need to just let her be.
I need to stop arguing with her.
That would be a good idea.
Taylor and I got into an argument today.
Was is about money or just you two in general?
Us in general, and after I walked out, he slammed the door on me.
What? Why?
I don't even know. I am just sitting in the living room by myself at the moment.
Well you can come over if things don't get better.
I am to the top of the mountain.
You finally did it.
It took hours to get here.
And a lot of effort, I bet.
Yeah with a lot of effort.
That's so good, happy for you.
This was a tough climb but it was all worth it.
The view alone is worthwhile.
It also teach me, that anything can be achieved if I work hard work for it.
We all have more ability than we credit ourselves.
I need a new challenge to undertake.
How about hiking a taller mountain?
I was walking down the road last night and Allison came out of no-where and almost hit me.
She has been drinking again.
We need to stage a intervention and get her some help.
I will call her parents and you can call our friends.
I met Carson's mother.
Was it your first time meeting her?
Yeah, I liked her, she was nice.
Carson gets his friendliness from her.
I met Carson's mother last week for the first time.
How was she?
She turned out to be really nice. I like her.
That's good to hear.
It is, especially since Carson and I are getting serious.
Well, at least you'll like your in-law if you guys get married.
I had a big moment in my relationship last week
That's awesome! What happened?
I met my partner's mom for the first time
Oh wow that is a big step!
Yeah everything went really well! I think we liked each other
That's great news! I'm glad it went well
I know everybody is mad that I sang the songs.
I think it is the fact that you knew they were Remy's.
More than one person can sing them.
Remi is supposed to be your friend though.
I' ll talk to Remi and let her know that she can have them.
That's what friends do.
I feel like crap but I did not know Remy was doing the same song. Really! I did not know.
You are full of crap, Carson. No one does Tom Waits songs like Remy does.
No one knows who Tom Waits is. But he's my favorite. I was just trying to be unique.
You know Remy only listens to Tom Waits. You bought her the box-set for Christmas, you idiot!!!
Oh yeah. That's why I could not get those tunes out of my head.
And now you just lost your Jersey Girl forever!!
Do you think it's fun to go to the circus?
Are you planning to go to the circus?
Yeah, I want to take my sister there,  I want it to be a fun day for her.
I went to the circus last month, it was fun.
Okay, I'll get the tickets .
Your sister will love it.
I like my sister.
She is a good kid.
I wanted to give her some fun time.
What did you do?
I took her to the circus.
She will remember that gesture until you are old and grey.
I can't remember ever being this tired before.
You look like you haven't slept in days.
I was working two shifts because my friend's sick.  I haven't had time to get more than a few hours sleep a night.
Your friend's indebted to you now.
I am so glad this week is finally over.
Robin, I really appreciate that you were able to cover my shifts this week. I am starting to feel better  now.
I'm glad you are feeling better. And of course I would cover for you. My feet are just protesting it at the moment.
Well, when I feel better, I will give you a pedicure to make up for it.
That sounds like a deal! Thank you.
No, thank you.
I'm so tired. How long do I have to keep taking over your shift?
I know, I'm sorry! I have a virus so I don't know how long I'm gonna be sick for.
Yeah, well, thankfully we are talking over the phone and not in person.
I wouldn't let you come near me right now!
I know. Well, I hope you feel better soon. Karen and Jack really miss you and so do I!
It shouldn't be too much longer now...I hope. Thanks again for covering for me.
I can't wait to go to bed tonight. I am exhausted.
You've been working pretty late lately.
I am covering my friend's shift at work while she is sick.
That must be very hard. When do you expect her to return.
Soon hopefully. I can't take it for much longer.
You deserve all the rest you can get,.
Oh man oh man, I am super beaten up. I am ready to pass out.
Sorry you had to work my shift Robin. I appreciated it.
No problem. I am so tired but I can really use the money.
Those double shifts will kill you but I know what you mean.
I hope you feel much better. I can't do this anymore.
Well, my doctor told me to stay home for the next two weeks. Sorry bro.
I was so annoyed at Jordan. He hid my phone under a bushel as a prank.
Did it take you long to find it?
Yeah, it did.  I hunted around twenty minutes for it, and he was laughing all that time.
How'd you finally find it?
I borrowed someone else's phone and called it. I could hear it ringing and was able to locate it.
He wouldn't like it at all, if you hid his phone.
The prank we played on Sydney was epic!
What kind of prank did you fools pull on her this time?
We hid the phone under the bushel, she was looking all over for it.
What if she had got a important call and could not take it because you hid it?
We played a prank on Sydney
That must have been fun
It sure was
What was the prank?
We hid her phone under a bushel
I would have loved to be there
Jordan played a prank on me.  He hid my phone under a bushel.
How did you find it?
I just lifted it up and there it was.
Were you upset?
A little bit but Jordan is a prankster.  It's what he does.
That's good, glad you did not mind it.
I really seem to have trouble figuring this stuff out
well,  try to focus on the beginner stage and work your way up
Yeah, I understand the basic math but the algebra is just too hard
I don't see why we have to learn algebra anyways.
it does seem a little outdated to me
I guess if you want a good job you need to learn it
I spent all day studying because I have an exam in Chemistry.  It'll be a very difficult test.
At least you are studying for it.
I am too scared not to study.  I don't want to fail the test.
what is your grade in Chemistry?
It could be a C or C- judging from my midterm.
Alright, I guess you better study some more.
I can not believe how long I had studied for this test. It was a major test so I wanted to make sure that I was prepared.
Yeah, I'm very proud of you.
Thank you, I wanted to make sure that I was able to be fully prepared for it.
I know you will get a great score for it, you got this.
Addison and myself are getting married this summer.
Congratulations! Have you told everyone yet?
Not yet, we are going from person to person to announce this news to our closest friends and family.
I remember when you first met her five years ago.
We got along right from the start.
I felt that it could be something permanent three years ago.
Addison and I have decided to make you my best man on our wedding.
Are you serious, that is awesome!
I think you always knew it would be you, you' re my best friend.
I think I am gonna start crying man.
I just can't wait to have you standing up there with me on our big day.
It is going to be something neither one of us will forget.
I' m getting married!
What!?! Many congratulation on your big news.
Thank you, you are invited to my wedding.
I wouldn' t miss it for anything on the world.
Great, I'll send you the invitation.
Thank so much Austin.
I' m so happy that I was able to finally accomplish this goal.
You don' t know how proud I am of you, Austin.
It took a lot of hard work and commitment, but I did it.
Losing 200 pounds is a big deal and you actually did it.
You need to write a book or a blog or something that tells people how you did this.
You' re not the first person to suggest that.
I was shocked that my old pants didn't fit.
You have been doing a good job working out.
Yes, I do push ups everyday.
What about sit ups?
No, they hurt my stomach.
But they build up your abs!
I can't believe I've gotten so skinny, my belt isn' t even enough to hold my pants up anymore.
Yeah, you've lost a ton of weight. How much exactly?
About two hundred pounds.
You lost more weight than most people weigh. It's like you've lost a whole person.
I know, now I'm going to have to buy all new pants though because the belt isn't even working.
At least it will feel really good to buy some new clothes.
I finally wrote a cursive sentence. I crossed the t's and dotted the is. Look at it! it's so beautiful!
Good job Austin. I knew you could do it!
I can't believe it. It took me like a week to learn, but it was worth it.
Yep, it's a good skill to have, too. Really helps your writing like a pro.
I feel pretty happy, that I can finally write in cursive
you should be because you have worked so hard
I didn' t understand it at first but now it just comes naturally to me
things usually do when you repeat them over and over
We decided to change the name of our newborn from Bailey to Clara.
Oh, really? What prompted that decision?
Well, we think it sounds better, and now she's named after my Grandmother.
Oh, I see. Well, I think that is a really great name.
Thanks. What are you going to name your kids one day?
Ha ha. I don't know. Maybe William after my Great Uncle.
I hate being so absent minded.
What did you do?
I left my pen and paper in the other room.
What did you need it for?
I wanted to write Riley's autobiography.
Did you get started on it yet?
Do you need help for your autobiography?
Yes, I need a ghost writer.
I'm a writer. Let me help you with your autobiography.
Sure. I definitely  need your help, thank you. I left the pen and paper in the other room. I'll get it now.
I'll be waiting.
O.K, Riley, let's get started on your autobiography.
I'm ready to go.
O.K where were you born?
I was born in San Diego and...
Hold it, I left the pen and paper in the other room.
Nice to know you're so organized.
I think I left the pen and paper in the other room
I guess I will wait here until you get back
It's my favorite pen that my dad gave me before he died
I believe it is really sentimental to you, and you should really try not to lose it
I tried to cook something new and different.
Did you succeed?
I found a way to fix the duck.
That is a good start.
With the duck complete, I made some rice and bought napkins.
I hope you plan on sharing it.
After I fixed the duck,  I went to the store but they were out of everything. I just got rice and napkins.
That is so random. What's the duck?
Oh, my car.
You call your car the duck? Why?
It makes this stupid duck quack-like sound.
That's so funny. Glad you fixed it.
That was tricky
the duck you were trying to fix
Yeah, kinda hungry wonder if my rice is done, are you hungry, too?
Yeah, I love to have some food
oh damn I don' t have napkins, let me buy some
if you think its necessary
Rice pilaf is a pain in the butt to make.
You made rice pilaff?  That doesn't sound like you!
Yeah, well, it seemed like the best thing to make after I fixed the duck.
You cooked duck too?  I am amazed!  Is it as greasy as they say?
You are mistaken. I broke that wooded mallard statue in my father's office.  So, I had to go, buy glue, and piece it back together before he got home.  Somehow, after fixing the duck, rice pilaff sounded good to me.  But thanks for reminding me, I have to go get the napkins out of the car.
Let me guess, this has nothing to do with dinner either. What are you doing, stuffing your bra later?
Everyone's over here playing Madden. You should come.
When did you get Madden?
I just got it this morning! I sent everyone an invite on Facebook, but I guess you didn't get it.
Oh I haven't checked Facebook yet. Yeah maybe I'll stop by. That sounds fun.
It is! I'm so glad I got it. Bring some beer if you decide to come.
Okay you got it!
Its great that you could make it.
I know, I am really excited to play video games with you.
I've been wanting to test this new game, but was waiting for you and the crew.
Now that we are here, we should try it out.
Ok, lets get started.
The game looks awesome, I like the graphics.
Do you want to come over?
Sure, what time?
How about 7:00 this evening.
Okay, sounds good. What are we going to do?
I got this new game that we can play.
That sounds fun!
Sorry, Jordy, I was worried about your health.
Since when do you care about how I look?
I would love to spend more years with you, and staying health is the key.
I understand, but I love to eat, eating is my life and happiness. I guess we can work on it.
Okay, I get it. Here's the hot dog you wanted, but only one.
Deal. But can I have a peanut butter and jelly sandwich for dessert?
You just can't eat anything you want, Jordan.
I don't think that's any of your business.
I'm just worried about you.
Well, don't be.
I'll get you one hot dog.
If I hadn't forgotten my wallet, I'd get three hot dogs and fries like I want.
I spent the day grilling dogs.
What was going on?
I had a bbq and I wanted to make sure everyone was fed.
How many hot dogs did you grill?
Probably around 80.
We had a family gathering over the weekend.
That's awesome. How did it go?
It was great. I remember putting a lot of hot dogs on the grill.
Why so?
They were hungry.
Oh I see. Glad to hear you had fun.
It was a good thing that I knew the company filed for bankruptcy before I made the deal.
Do you think you should have made the deal at all?
Yeah, with some new ideas, I think I can turn the company around.
Are people still going to trust the brand?
New ownership is going to excite the market.
I wish you the best of luck with your new business venture.
Thanks for telling me about the company's financial troubles.
Did you use it when you were negotiating?
Yeah, I was able to make a better deal because of the bankruptcy report.
It pays off to have information.
I ended up meeting up with Carson late last night.
What did you guys do.
Well, we were supposed to meet for diner but he had to work late.
His job is very demanding.
Yes, it is. I'm just glad we saw each other.
It's nice of him to always make the effort.
Carson and I had dinner at the diner yesterday.
How nice! I know it's been a while since you've seen him!
Right! I was looking forward to it, but he showed up very late, so I was a little upset.
Oh, no! Did he say why he was late?
Yeah he did, but it did turn out all right.
I hope you had a nice time despite of that!
I have been waiting for a while now.
What are you waiting for?
Well I was supposed to meet Carson at the diner, but he had to work late, so he is going to meet me later.
I see, yes unfortunately this happens.
It does, I totally understand where he's coming from.
Yeah you really don't have a choice.
Yah, he ended up coming, he just came a little later than expected.
Do you know what his hold up was by any chance?
Yah, he had to work late, so I just waited and he joined me later.
Well, that was very nice of you to wait!
Of course, it wasn't anything that he could really help!
No, I guess it wasn't. Still, nice of you to wait!
I was supposed to meet Carson for dinner but he worked late.
So did you end up not going?
No, we went.  He just met me there a bit later.
How late was he?
About half an hour.  I just had a drink at the bar while I was waiting for him.
Now for my last number, I will perform a new song.
I love this new song, it sounds so good.
This song is inspired by a close friend of mine.
I think the song might be about me.
This friend has been so close, and always been there for me through the years.
I feel so happy that I have such a great friend.
I always save one of my more uplifting songs for the end.
I thought the show was great, but thought you had that song earlier in your set.
I have before but I read the crowd and decided to sing that last.
Well the crowd loved it. That standing ovation lasted forever.
It wasn't forever but I felt all the love for that song and the show.
You are a great performer. I am always impressed.
I had fun at the school carnival.
Did you enjoy the rides?
No, I was running a ride, because I was a volunteer worker.
What did you have to do?
I just put the ride in motion and stopped it after a few minutes.
So, you enjoyed seeing everyone else have fun.
I really love my job at the school carnival these days.
It sounds like a lot of fun to help the school.
Yeah, I get to put the rides in motion for the kids.
This is so much fun and I love each ride there.
The school is doing a great job for the kids this year.
I'm really happy to be a part of this and I hope this happens again next year.
I am glad to be home again .
We are glad to have you back. How are the injuries.
They are healing. I don't think I will ever forget that night.
You did what Kai told you to do, when attacking them.
We did not need to kill those kids, who were being held hostage.
We have to fight when we are told.
You have to follow orders at all times
I always follow what I was told.
Yeah that's how war goes.
I made Kai attack an army
Hopefully it worked out well
I really want to win this war.
What is your strategy to win this war?
I made Kai attack at night.
Why do you think that's the best strategy?
Because at night they will be less prepared for a surprise attack.
That does sound like a good strategy.
I am sure you're going to do a great job you always make it works.
This is very lovely of you to say, thanks you so much. I have been anxious about starting this new job, but it's a step I need to make.
Yeah, you've got to do what's best for you.
It's just hard going on a completely new project. So much uncertainty.
You got it up and running on this one in like a week. You will be great for sure.
That's true, I really appreciate the pep talk.
There were so many things about this new job that I did not like. Thankfully everything has been cleared up
I have heard terrible things about this position, I am happy that you got it sorted
It is not as bad as it was since we cleared this up. I met the manager today and he was super nice and respectful
Alright, I am surprised.
He is a great person and this job is actually going to be interesting
I am glad to hear the great news.
I just made some rice and taken a break now.
this sounds nice. I'm still on the call.
Did you get all the answers you needed?
yes got a few answers, but still waiting for a few to be answered.
Try to ask questions that is not too common, which makes it more interesting.
this is a great idea, will do this.
I just had such a good conversation on the phone!
Haha I bet you were on it all night!
Ii was, it was a very interesting conversation, I really enjoyed it. If it was not time to make some rice and, I would still be on the phone. I also need to use the restroom
Oh yes, I fancy some rice, too. Could you make me some as well?
Sure no problem, I only have brown rice, is this alright?
Yah sounds awesome. Thank you so much!
I just had a lovely chat on the phone. But right now I feel like today is my lazy day. All I want to do is to kick back and relax.
You deserve it Sasha, you studyreally hard all week.
Yes, I did, really want to get a good grade on the test, fingers crosssed.  I going to make a cup of tea now,  and may cook some rice for dinner, really fancy some rice.
That sounds awesome, let me make the tea.
Wonderful! Wanna stay for lunch? I make some rice for both of us and we can lounge around all day.
Yes, love this idea, it sounds like the perfect afternoon.
I am so upset and emotionally distraught at the moment.
I understand Jesse. Sadly this seems to be the only option. I know how much you love your dog.
I can't believe that after all these years, I have to put my beloved dog up for sale.
Well, it was your decision to leave the country.
That doesn't make me feel any better.
Apologies, and try not to worry, I am sure your dog will find a loving home.
I am leaving the cointry and need to sell my dog. It is really upsetting,  but I need to get out of the country.
Can you leave it with a friend or family?
I already asked my friends and family, they are unable to take care of him.  They don't have the space.
Did you put an add out?
Not yet,  I am thinking about doing it this weekend.
Just hold on for now.  Let me ask my mom,  maybe we could have a dog at the house.
I have to sell my dog, Binks. I am really upset, I've had him since I was a kid.  But I'm going to be out of the country for a year at least and can't take him with me.
I am sorry to hear this, I am sure he will find a nice family, he is a lovely dog. Did you find someone?
I think so. They seemed to be a really nice family, and they really like him.
This is good to know.I know you are going to miss him. I am so happy he is in good care.
It's going to be hard to ever forget him. Binks is the best dog in the world, we shared so many fun times together.
I am really upset, that I had  to let  go of my dog.
Why are you giving that lovely dog up?
I have to travel abroad for at least a year and I can't take him with me. I had to put him up for sale.
 I am so sorry, I bet he will miss you dearly.
Yes, he will, I miss him already. I hope I can fid someone nice to look after him.
When will be coming back? Let me ask my parents if we can look after him until you get back
this will be so great, thank you, so much. I should be back next summer.
I have to stay on for another year, the project took longer than expected.
I thought you were coming back to the states next month.
We had a few long delays due to the harsh weather. I am so upset, as the only option is to put pooky up for sale.
Don't worry, he is a lovely dog, I can keep the dog at my house and you can still see him, when you come for a visit.
You would do that for me? This is wonderful, I am forever grateful for this.
this is not a problem at all, he keeps me company and he is such a sweet dog
I am so dizzy, my mum just picke dme up and spun me around.
Why was she doing this?
She got some news on a letter she received today, and was so excited.
It must be good news for her to be so excited?
yes it was, she was delighted, and in her enthusiasm she spun me around in the air and I weigh 200 pounds.
That is a lot of delight.
My mum is overexcited and so happy when she read her email, she started cheering and laughing.
 Oh did she get the job, she applied for last week?
Yes she got the job she really wanted! She was so excited and suddenly picked me up and spun me around. I was so surprised.
This is very good news, please send her my congrats, I am so happy that she got that job, she was so excited about it
I will pass this to her, thank you.
I have some exciting news, Austin proposed and ask me to marry him.
oh this is fabulous news, many congratulations. Such great news.
Yeah, I'm over the moon and so happy.
Yeah, he really loves you.
Yeah, I'm so happy that I picked him up and spun him around.
this is so lovely.
Can you believe I have now lost 100 pounds in two months!
You look amazing! How did you lose the weight?
I followed my doctors advice and boom it was just gone!
I need to go see your doctor as well, I have some extra pounds to shed
It was easy, just do what the dr says and it seems effortless
Well congrats and I might grab your dr's number from you
I did exactly as the doctor said. Look, I lost a hundred pounds in 2 months.
That's a lot of weight and you look great.
It really was. It was not easy to lose it.
I do believe it took some efforts. I know you were trying for a long time.
I'm going to continue the doctor's advice to keep it off.
That is no small achievement. Many congratulations.
I tried getting hold of Carson, but she was working so I texted her friend instead.
Her friend as in that guy she brought to the party the other day?
Yeah, him.
Oh, what an interesting development. Did you guys hang out?
We did, it was a lot of fun actually.
Oh I can only imagine!
I wanted to go to the movies with Carson, but he was busy.  So I texted one of his friends instead.
Did you hang out with his friend?
His friend is so funny.  He makes me laugh all the time.
Where did you guys go?
We found out there was a comedy show going on at the bar so we went there.
Drinks and laughter.  Perfect combo.
I can't believe I lost my job.
That's terrible.  What are you going to do?
I don't know--I can't even afford groceries.
I can help you with that for a while.
Thanks for lending me the money.
Don't worry about it.  You can pay me back when you get back on your feet.
Are you ok Jesse can you walk?
I can't, my ankle hurts really badly.
It looks like its broken, lets get you to a doctor.
It really hurts, I want to cry.
Hold on tight, I will carry you to the car.
Thank you very much Austin.
He was the greatest dad ever. I am not just saying that because he was my dad. He did so much for the community.
I know. He use to clear the snow with his snowblower for the entire neighborhood.
I remember that. He also cut the grass for juice or a nice cold glass of lemonade.
He took me and my sisters to the beach every year!
I remember that!  Those were good times, I will treasure for ever.
He use to come over my house and help my mother with making the bed every Friday.
I am glad I was able to stuck every chord of the congregation's hearts.
That sounds like a hard task.
It was hard, took a lot of preparation.
I'm sorry to hear about the loss of your father.
I cried because of his loss and so did the congregation, its been hard for us.
I can imagine, loosing a father can be really painful specially if you were close.
Oh my, I was so nervous, I almost fainted when I was on the stage.
Don't worry, you did wonderful up there. Almost everyone in the congregation was in tears.
Thanks so much, I can use a drink, how about you?
You better believe it, follow me. I must say you sang great. I never knew you were so good.
You think so? Thanks. I've come to realize that when I'm in an emotional mood, I sing better for some reason.
Hmm, that makes sense. It's gonna be so different without your dad around.
Thanks for coming to my father's funeral yesterday. It means the world to me.
Absolutely nothing could keep me away. Your father was one of the nicest people I ever met.
I was so sad that I didn't think I could say a eulogy for him, but I let my heart do the talking.
And what a nice eulogy, everyone in the congregation loved every word you said.
I am trying to think of some other way I can honor his memory.
Your father was such a kind, generous man. As your friend, I'm wondering if maybe we can think of kind little acts to pay it forward...
I've been wanting this job for so long.  I finally got an interview.
That's so exciting.  Where are you interviewing at?
It's at the top accounting firm in town.   They have so many big corporate clients.
I hope you get the job.
Me too.  I know someone who's working there so I am hoping that would help me.
I am sure that helps.
I have no idea how I did on that interview, yesterday, I was so nervous.
You were probably fine, you have wanted that job forever.
Yes, but that does not mean I aced the interview!
If it does not work out for you, my uncle knows people on Wall Street, and can get you a few interviews.
Oh that is good to know. Your uncle is a great guy. Thanks so much
Sure thing. Just let me know if you need his number.
This morning I got a call from the Pritz company.
Hang on, you mean from the prestigious Pritz?
Yes, they called me for an interview.  I have applied countless times for a job there.
Wow! How did the interview go?
Can you imagine it was surprisingly easy?
Really? I can't comprehend that Sydney.
I would do anything for you, my son.
Thank you dad, I would do anything for you too.
You are the best son a father could ever wish for.
And you are the best father a son could have!
let's give hugs to the two most wonderful people.
Bailey, I put the car keys in your lunchbox, today, as a surprise. What did you do with them?
Oh no, I traded lunch with Spats today.
Bailey, what did you do? I wanted to surprise you with a new card for being such a great son.
I will call Spats to get those keys back, but I think he was cruising around town.
Ugh, Bailey call him NOW!! Its a new car.
Can we just drive around town and look for him. By the way, I don't like tuna sandwiches.
You know kid, you're a keeper
aw thanks dad, this is so lovely of you to say
You never have to worry about anything, I'll always be there for you
you are a great dad, anyone can wish for
Whatever you need son, let me know
Just to let you know,  I'm here for you, too, daddy
I think my son needs a break.
You are doing too much for him.
He is such a good son, I took him out for dinner.
He had lobster and I was stuffed with a steak!
That is because he earned it!
I agree, he does work very hard.
I'm so nervous about this new school.
I can see what you mean,  but I think you should go to school.
Yeah I will, it's important.
Also we have sport today.
Yes, I was told to run the track.
I did that too.
I should never have went to that concert, last night. Now I know,  I will do terribly on the test, today.
Didn't you study prior to going to the concert?
I did, but the extra 3 or 4 hours would have helped, I supposed.
I am sure you will be fine. You have a B, and it is the end of the semester.
Going back to the concert, was really good though. So yes, maybe everything will be fine.
Just relax beforehand and clear your mind before you go in to take the test.
I think I am going to fail the last test I took at school.
Why? Didn't you study hard for it?
Well, yes and no. I attended a concert the night before and I was really tired the following day.
What? You stayed up all night knowing that the finals was in the morning?
Yes, but he concert was only on for one night. They might never come back to our town sometimes soon.
I don't know what to say, if you don't pass the exam, it will be all on you
I think I am going to fail this test today
Why? Did you not study for it?
 I did not, but I was up all night and was distracted
why were you distracted?
I was at the concert last night, now I feel so unprepared
I see. Best of luck though!
I shouldn't have stayed out so late last night, now I am so tired.
How was the concert though, did you have fun?
It was great, I had a lot of fun. But now I feel like I'm going to fail the test.
You'll do fine as long as you studied a little bit.
I don't feel like I studied enough at all, and I feel so exhausted.
Well next time you'll know better than to go to a late show the night before a big test.
I was so nervous doing the best man's speech at the wedding today.
I thought you did a great job.
Thank you. But I could have sworn I was shaking so much, that I thought the mic would fall out of my hand.
I don't think anybody at the event has noticed it.
Being the best man at a wedding kind of made me want to get married too.
Just don't make me the best man. I'm really horrible at giving speeches.
Okay, I agree. I'll do the honors to speak.
You are his best friend after all, Carson.
Greetings to you all,  welcome to the wedding of Eugene and Ashley.
Three Cheers!
Never has there been a more loving couple.
Give a Toast! Give a Toast!
My friend made me the best man at his wedding as well.  I did the honors and spoke nicely of him.
You mean you didn't make fun of him?
Well, maybe just a little.  I don't think I embarrassed him too much.
Where was the wedding?
It was on this old plantation along the lake.
Those plantations are beautiful.
I had to help Aubrey get over her fear of dogs.
Aww, that's so sweet. Is she still scared?
I think she's getting a little used to them.
That's good enough. Rome wasn't built in a day.
let me put your hands on the dog
That may make me feel better.
It's a new dog.
He is so sweet
just stroke him gently
He is so soft!
It's ok, he won't bite you. You can pet him.
I'm scared. What if he does bite me?
He won't. He is a very friendly dog. See? I'm slowly putting your hands on him.
Aw, you're right. He is a very nice dog. 
I told you!
Ok, I think I'll be leaving now.
Wow, what a beautiful dog. Do you want to hold it?
No, I'm scared of dogs.
Come on, the dog doesn't bite.
No thank you, I feel uneasy on holding him.
It's nothing, give me your hand.
Okay, but just my hands.
So how have things been going with you and Lee
We are great, thank you. Lee proposed to me last week, and we are going to get married soon
that's amazing news. My girlfriend is pregnant, so we will have a baby in about 5 months
well this is exciting, congratulations to you both, too.
I guess things are going great for everyone
I gave Lee's girlfriend a ride the other day.
She looks like a nice girl, doesn't she?
She does and she is really in love with Lee
I'm glad to hear that, they do make a nice couple.
I was so glad I ,was able to give Lee a ride home last night.
She told me that she was glad as well.
She gave up her own time to help me out with my homework, so I had to do something for her in return.
It seems like you both were appreciate of what each other did.
She's an amazing person, and I will do whatever I have to do in order to make her happy.
That is very kind of you Jesse.
You know, that plays aren't really my thing.
I do know, but this one has good reviews.
What's it about?
It's basically a western, with lots of action.
That doesn't sound so bad.
Great, let's plan to go and watch it on Friday.
I don't like it when Kai drives!
He is always distracted while driving!
I saved his car from destruction by grabbing the steering wheel yesterday.
I am sure he wasn't paying attention again?
Yes! he stopped paying attention to the road all of a sudden.
he really needs some advice on how to drive safely.
I jumped off a diving board yesterday afternoon.
How did you finally work up the courage to do it?
I just stood on the end of the board, filled my lungs with air, and started to run.
Once you started to run, there was no turning back, I bet!
That's right. Once I started running I was fully committed.
That took a lot of courage. I'm proud of you!
So I was pretty nervous before the race. I decided to do my stretches and listened to some music.
That's a good way to start for sure. What happened next?
Well, I stood on the board, took a deep breath so that my lungs were full of air, and kept my earbuds in my ears until the race started.
Nice, you sounded like you were really prepared!
Yes, I was totally in the zone.
That's awesome, I'm glad you did so well.
I asked my parents for one more cookie after I finished the one I had, but they said I shouldn't eat any more sugar.
How many cookie did you have?
Just one.  I am diabetic so they are very strict with my sugar intake even when I am not.
They are looking out for your health.
I know that.  I love desserts so much and they are unhealthy for me.
You can have a cookie once in a while.
So I did something that was a little controversial in my class
What was that?
I decided to let the class debate creation versus the big bang
Oh I bet that it got very heated
Yeah the class was definitely split into two groups
Honestly sometimes a discussion like that is really good for the class
Okay guys is everyone ready for the big debate tonight?
Yeah, but what we discussing?
Tonight's panel discussion is on the origins of the Universe.
Oh Wow, the big one. I might ask are we accepting any new theories?
Mainly just the main two narratives. The side that leans toward creation versus the side that believes in the big bang theory.
This should be a good debate.
Im glad  everyone was so nice at school
people are really nice to you because youre pretty
i dont really think that's the case but it is nice to hear
i'm sure you will be really popular with everyone and you're good at sports too
I was so dreading my first day of school, but it was actually fun!
See, you just needed to give it a chance.
Yeah, I guess so, I loved it, it was a great first day
Did you meet new friends?
I did, everyone was so nice, including the teachers
Good, that makes school life easier!
I just celebrated my first week at the new job!
So, what do you think of it?
I already love it. It's exactly what I wanted and there's so many possibilities there.
I'm glad to hear that. I know you were unhappy at the old place.
You have no idea, I'm just so happy that I am here now.
I just started a new job.
Really? How do you like it?
I really love it.
That's great to hear. Most people don't like their jobs.
I just started, so it may be too soon to know if I'll still love it after a while.
At least you like it so far. I hated my job from the beginning.
I started my job last week.
How's it going?
So far it's great, the best job I've had.
Do you like your new co-workers?
They seemed great. They are friendly and really helpful to me.
Fantastic. I'm glad it's going so well.
I played with a ringer today.
Who did you get to play on your team?
Ash's dad joined in after a long day, and we wound up winning the game.
Ash's dad was All-Pro.
The other players didn't know that.
That is what I call a ringer.
Wow, what a crazy long day today was!
Oh? Tell me about it!!
I had a really long day at work, then got invited to play football with Ash's dad.
Oh wow. How did the football game go?
Surprisingly, I won! I was surprised to win because I was so tired.
That's awesome! Congratulations on winning!
Man that was great.
What was great?
I played some good football with Ash's dad after a never ending day at work. The best part is we ended up winning.
Very cool, congratulation.
Hey guess what? I saw Ash's dad at the park the other day, playing a game of football with his friends.
Oh cool. How did it go?
He asked me to join in to fill in for a player on his team.
That's nice of him.
And the best part was that I got to score the winning touchdown!
That's awesome.
Wow, that dinner was outstanding. I really enjoyed it.
I have been watching the Food Network and learned so much.
Really. Who needs to go to culinary school when you have the Food Network.
I am trying to be the next Iron Chef.
Go for it. Just give Guy Fieri a buzz.
I will, his cooking is amazing.
Good to see you Mom.
Hello Lee. I'm glad you could make dinner.
Yeah, it's been a while. Jan keeps me so busy around the house. And we're expecting a baby.
Yes, this is exciting,  but please, you have to make time for your old mom and your dad and your sisters and brothers. We love to see you around
I try really hard to Mom. You know how work is.
Oh never-mind Lee. I'm just glad you're here with us tonight for a change.
I just got back from visiting my family!
How did it go?
There was so much traffic so I wasn't sure if I'd make it to dinner on time. Luckyly I did!
You should leave earlier next time to account for traffic.
I know. I totally meant to but I had to stop at the bank on the way there.
Well, I'm glad it all worked out for you this time.
I am here everyone!
Welcome Lee! I hope you're hungry!
I am! Nothing better than dinner with the family.
I completely agree!
Such a great time all around.
I can't believe we broke up!
What happened?
We fought for awhile and when she left, I locked her out.
Oh I bet she was mad.
Yeah, so mad she broke up with me
I am so sorry to hear this.
I finally decided on what to get for Jane.
What did you get her?
I got her a new suitcase for Christmas.
That's nice of you.
I handed the new suitcase to her at Christmas.
Glad it worked out.
Last Christmas, I bought Jane a present.
What did you get her?
I bought her a new suitcase.
What do you plan on giving her this coming holidays?
Definitely not another suitcase.
You are so funny
Jane lost the suitcase.
What suitcase?
The one I bought her for her birthday!
Oh, no!  I know she loved that gift!  But wait. I saw her with that bag yesterday!
Yeah. So, when I found out about her loss, I bought an exact duplicate suitcase and gave it to her on Christmas!  You saw the replacement!
Well, she is an absent-minded girl. I suggest you fill your closet with a few more replacement suitcases. It is only a matter of time before she loses this one too.
I think that it's always good to help out people in need.
I agree, especially the elderly
A lot of times they are forgotten by people including their own family
I can never so this to my family.
Sometimes, people can be irresponsible .
I'm glad that you were there and able to help as much as you can.
Interesting.
What do you mean?
I honestly wholeheartedly want to help the care for the old woman.
 This is very nice of you.
Thanks for coming along to swim with me, today.
Thanks for inviting me.
I'm glad you accepted it. Cameron didn't feel like going.
Yeah, I think he's just being lazy.
Which is too bad since he could use the exercise.
Swimming is so fun, I don't even consider it an exercise.
Heya, do you want to come swimming today? Cameron opted out.
Sure Aubrey I don't mind. What time will we be leaving?
Great, we will leave this Saturday at 09:00 am with some friends,  to go to Lake Lenier.
Awesome, should I bring anything for personal or group use?
Yes please, bring a pack of sodas and your own towel, swim short, and a snorkel.
Okay, will do. I'll see you later.
I just got back from the local swimming pool.
With your son? I hear he always enjoys swimming.
Cameron didn't want to go swimming today. I was thinking of going by myself but decided to invite Cameron's friend instead.
Did he accept your offer?
Yeah, he did, we had a fun time there.
It's too bad your son couldn't make it. But you could always try again next week.
I cant believe Cameron didn6't want to go swimming on such a nice day
I can come with you if you like
that sounds great. just grab your swimming trunks and we can leave
let me get some money for snack too and my water bottle
I feel really bad that I wasn't home last night when Jesse stopped over.
How did you know he was there?
My friends were there and talked to him for awhile.
You better be careful with them spending time around Jesse.
I trust Jesse, even though I don't trust them after what happened last time.
Maybe you should tell Jesse to text you first to make sure you are home.
Hey Jesse, whats up
I thought you were busy Bailey
well I was, but then a few things got opened up
why didn't you tell me
oh I thought you were busy
you know I wanted to see you, to collect a few books I left.
Jesse came over today, but I wasn't there.
Then how do you know he came by?
Two of my friends were here. They said he stayed for about 15 minutes.
You left your friends at your house alone?
They're visiting from out of town and staying with me.
So this was their first time meeting Jesse. What did they think of him?
I am going on a blind date and am a bit nervous
it's okay to be nervous, their is nothing wrong with that
Oh really? had to bring Tracy along for moral support
oh, that's good then, did it help
Yeah!! just needed someone here to keep track on me
I think Tracy is the best option when it comes to that.
I really wish that my store had a better experience.
What do you mean.
It only lasted for a short while,  we had to close .
What happen that made you guys have to close it
We didn't get too any visitors and we lost business
I see, that is horrible. I am sorry to hear this
I had to close my store today. It lasted no longer than a month.
That's awful! It just wasn't getting enough business?
Yeah, nobody came to purchase anything. Everyone's too preoccupied with purchasing stuff online or at big chains.
I know, the modern world is so tough on small brick and mortar stores. There's not much you can do.
I worked hard to open this store, but it was all for nothing.
Not necessarily! You could always apply your newly acquired business skills to a new enterprise. Or use them to help out a larger, more stable corporation.
I had to close my store for good.
Oh I am sorry,  why?
I think it was in a bad location, no one would ever come in and look around.
Well, you know what they say...
Location, location, location.
Maybe you can open up again in a better place.
18 years ago I had my own store.
Really what did you sell at your store?
Knick knacks I picked up on my travels. But no-one must have wanted them because I had to close the store after the first month.
Why did you give up and close so early?
I didn't have a single customer coming in.
That's too bad. I would have bought something from your store.
Aubrey gave me her attorney's number to consult with him.  He has a  great reputation. He got Aubrey a huge settlement on her case.
Everyone needs a good attorney on their side.
I agree, it is very helpful.
Why do you need a attorney?
 I am being sued, so now I need to find representation.
Who's suing you?
I know you have a great lawyer, can you please have this number?
Why? What to get yourself into?
I have a car accident. I don't know if it was my fault, so I need a good lawyer.
How did that happen? I know you are a careful driver.
It happened so fast. It was raining and I didn't see them crossing.
I'm sure he can help you, so give him a ring right now.
I needed a lawyer.
Have you found one?
I remembered Aubrey had an attorney with a great reputation.
Did you contact him?
I called his office, interviewed him over the phone and hired him on the spot.
That was a smart move.
I'm so fed up with Skylar's behavior.
What did he do this time.
He hasn't been paying me the court ordered child support.
Oh, this is not very nice of him.
Guess what I did, I put his stuff on Craigslist and kicked him out.
Oh, wow. I hope things get better now, that he is gone.
I was tired of Skylar not paying child support.
Did you do anything about it?
I listed all of his belongings on Craigslist.
What belongings?
When he moved out, he left half his stuff behind.
I think your entitled to sell his things after a certain period of time.
If you want to be rich, you have to be smart.
Is that how you became rich?
Yes, aside from being smart you have to be open minded and take risk.
What other advice would you have for someone who is trying to be rich ?
Read books on financial advice and network with people.
Great, I'm looking forward to it.
I'm glad that I studied finance market
I heard you were really doing pretty good with your earnings
I cant really complain, I love to help people
I've been told you were the best planner in this city
I don't want to brag, but that is pretty amazing
I need new clothes, I'm going shopping after work today.
Do you have enough money?
Yes, I made enough money today.
What do you plan to buy?
I need some new clothes and get shoes later.
What mall are you going to shop at?
I made quite the commission today.
Nice, how much did you sell?
I made some huge sales, probably a few thousand.
 Good job, well done.
I think I'll buy myself some nice clothes to celebrate.
Sounds well deserved.
I feel so good that I have been working so hard
maybe we could go shopping for some new clothes for a celebration
I think I made more than enough and can spend a little
you could even buy me something nice if you feel like it
I guess we will see about that
I was scared last night.
What happened?
I woke up to about 2 A.M to a loud noise in the house.
Did you investigate?
At first I was too frightened to move, but eventually I discovered that a stray cat had knocked over the trashcan outside my window.
Just scrounging for food.  I bet you were relieved.
I didn't sleep well last night, and I feel tired now.
Why didn't you sleep well ?
I heard a loud noise in the house.
Did you get up and see what it was?
No. I was too frightened to get up.
So you just laid there awake?
A loud noise woke me up in the middle of the night
The wind was blowing hard last night, did you ever get that window fixed?
Maybe it was that.
I can help you fix the window.
I finally got a new bright blue gem, I had been wanting for so long.
How big is the gem?
It is almost as big as my fist.
That is pretty big, is it worth anything?
No the material is fake but they are supposed to look real.
I guess if it was real, it would have cost too much.
I really enjoy gem collecting.
Is this a new hobby?
Yeah, I've been building a collection.
Did you get any new gems?
Yeah, I got a new one that's green, I added it to my collection.
Sounds like a nice gem.
I'm so excited!
What happened?
Well, you know I've been collecting gems for a while.
Yeah, it seems like a really cool hobby.
I just added a really special gem to my collection.
You'll have to let me see it some time.
It took me so long to build this collection. I just added a new gem to it recently.
Really what type of gem did you add to it.
It was a really shinny green stone I think maybe emerald.
Oh those are nice and very valuable.
I know, I love it.
I don't think I will be able to go out for days.
Why what happened?
I had a water pipe burst so I hadn't showered for days.
No wonder you smelled
Hmm so can I come to your place?
No problem you are always welcome.
I really need to take a shower.
Yeah, you kind of smell bad.
I'm sorry, I haven't taken a shower in days.
Do you want to take a shower at my house?
Would you let me?
Sure, I'd do anything for a friend.
My water pipe broke.
You smell.
That's because I haven't showered in days.
That probably has something to do with your broken water pipe.
I need to get it fixed.
I feel so dirty and unclean!
Why haven't you showered?
A water pipe burst in my apartment and I am waiting for the plumber.
When is the plumber coming?
Next week sadly.
Grab some clothes and come shower at my apartment.
I thought I could just take Ash's bike to school because he was sick today.
Did he come and take it back from you?
Yeah, I guess he wasn't that sick so he wanted to ride it.
Maybe you should have made sure before you took it from him.
We always borrow things from each other, but he seemed mad about it.
I think you guys should talk about it, and you can apologize to him.
Let's feed the horses.
We need to check if the oats got wet from the storm.
Let me just feel them. The are a little damp, but we can feed it to them.
We need to get them so fresh water, too.
These oats are too wet to feed.
Yea let's get them dried off.
I love these horses.
It makes me feel good to take care of them.
Me too, they are beautiful.
I agree.
Hi Jess, what's up?
Hi! How was your event.
It was great. I won an award for one of my new songs.
No way. So happy for you. Shall we open that bottle of champagne?
I'd love that.
Wow, I cannot believe I won another Grammy. Whoa!
That's nine in a row. How did you do that?
I just know how to move people with my music.
You are a genius. I don't understand how you crank out this music.
Simple, I used this new app on my phone. No sweat.
seemed like a good app
My band won an award at last night's talent show.
That's great news. One day you all will be famous.
There was a scout from one of the major labels there.
Maybe you'll get lucky and get a phone call.
I hope so. We need this badly. We are all practically starving.
Good luck! You guys sound great and deserve it.
I have to show you a picture of my new baby cat.
Aww, you got a cat!
I did! He's so wonderful. I got him from a rescue. I was just so lonely all alone in my house, especially at night.
A cat was a good idea, then. Has he been keeping you company?
He has, he's always cuddling with me and very talkative too, always meowing.
He sounds like a fun kitty. I'll have to come over and meet him soon.
My cat came home with me because I didn't want to feel lonely.
Were you going to leave your cat?
My roommate said she would look after her.
Did your roommate not go home for the holidays?
She can't.  She's an international students.  There are no international flights right now.
That's right.
Meet my new cat.
Oh my goodness, she is so adorable!
Honestly I bought her because I felt so lonely.
That makes sense.
Are you thinking about getting a cat yourself?
I don't think so actually. I don't think my dog would get along with one.
I really feel alone in this house sometimes.
Are you going to try and meet someone or something?
No, I actually got a cat instead!
What a great idea! Nothing like a kitten to cheer you up!
Agreed, I love him already!
I am feeling lonely in my home all alone.
I am sorry to hear that.
So I bought a cat.
What have you name it?
I really love the beauty on this route.
I agree, it really shows off the season.
I love the changing color of the leaves.
The white aspen trees are so beautiful.
I don't really remember this part of the route.
Are you lost?
Today. Isort of got lost while driving
Was it after work?
Yeah I took a scenic route, but made a wrong turn somewhere
Oh that is no fun, did you make it home?
I did, but it took a while
At least you got to enjoy the scenic route!
Yesterday, I got lost as I was going home
How could you get lost in a place you know?
I took a route that has a beautiful scenery, you know the park area?
Yes I know the place, its beautiful
Yeah! so I didn't know how to get out of there
Well, next time take routes that you are familiar with
Remy paid for all of my school fees. He's such a good person.
That's so great; you must feel so grateful.
I really do. I hope one day to be able to repay him.
I think, you getting your dream job will make him happy.
Probably, but I still hope to pay him back in other ways.
You will, your a good person too.
I'm so grateful for Remy. If not for her I would not have this awesome job in my favorite field.
What exactly did she do for you?
She paid for my all tuition. I had no money and was contemplating just getting a full time job after high school.
She must have really recognized your potential.
I suppose so. And now I'm doing what I love and getting paid for it.
You should buy her a nice present as a thank you.
Remy is educated and makes the money.  That frees me up to do something I enjoy.
How long have you two been married?
A little over two years.  He's so supportive of me.
That's so important that he's supportive of your endeavors.
He told me not to worry about the money, to just follow my heart.
He's the breadwinner.
I will be leaving to start classes soon.
So classes are starting already.
Yes the upcoming semester is just a few days away.
When did you decide to go back to college.
Remy offered to pay for my classes and is going to hire me after I graduate.
That sounds like a really good deal, good luck in school.
I wanted my hair to be bright blue.
But it's still black.
Yeah, the hair dresser told me that the natural color needs to b remove first.
Oh
Yeah, am going there tomorrow.
I am exciting to see the new hair color.
Have you ever tried to bleach or color your hair?
I haven't because I am too scared of messing it up.
 I spent so much money and time trying to bleach my hair so I could color it blue.
I see it is back to your original color, what happened?
It did not work out and I paid $200 for it
That is exactly why I have never tried!
We are going to strip the color from your hair first.
What for?
Well we need a uniform color for the band. I chose bright blue.
I don't want bright blue hair.
If you want to be in the band, then you will have bright blue hair.
I'd rather concentrate on the music than the hair.
In order for us to get our hair blue, at first we must strip the natural color out of our hair first.
How hard will that be?
It is easy.  We just need to buy the chemicals from Sally Beauty Supply.
I am somewhat scared to put all of those chemicals in my hair.
It is safe.  Don't worry about it.
If you say so, Alex.
I'm going to the hair salon today to get my hair dyed.
Are you getting the blue color, like you said?
Yes, I can't wait, I just have to get it bleached first.
I am not keen on getting my hair bleached it hurts.
Same, hopefully it won't be that bad this time.
I can't wait to see te new color.
I can't believe you told my dad about me!
I only did it because I was worried. He's got a lot of good ideas for jobs!
It was still bad. What did he say? Was he upset?
No, he gave me this list of people for you to call. They all have businesses.
Well I probably wouldn't have asked him, but please let me see the list.
Try these people. I didn't want to get you in trouble but I really wanted to help.
Oh, no. I forgot something. We need to head back.
We're already halfway there. What did you forget?
I forgot my wallet at home.
That's pretty important for paying for meals.
Could you stop giving me a hard time.
Alright, lets head back for it.
I don't feel like going home and cooking. Do you want to go somewhere for dinner?
Sure, you pick it.
How about that new place on Division Street?
Good idea! I've heard they have great pizza!
Oops, never mind. I stupidly left the house without my wallet this morning.
Don't worry about it! You can pay me back.
Shoot, I left my wallet at home.
No problem, I can cover you.
Are you sure, you don't mind?
Yeah, it's totally fine.
I will pay you back as soon as possible.
Okay, cool!
I don't even remember the last time I ate or slept!
How does one not remember the last time they ate or slept?
I can't stop playing the new videos games, that just came out.
Well that's cool, except you need to sleep and eat!
I know, but I just get lost in the game, that I forget to eat and I am not even tired.
You are going to crash one day!
It is true what they say about video games.
What do they say about video games?
They say they are addictive.
Are you addicted to video games?
I was playing video games for days on end, and even forgot to eat or sleep.
You are addicted to video games.
I think I have a problem.
What's happened?
I am addicted to the video game, and it is out of control.
You need to stop playing the game and go outside for a bit.
you are right, I have not eaten or even slept in days.
If you need help I am here.
He laura did you go to the ball game?
Ball-- what? Sorry I got lost in your eyes....
Haha. Thanks but I really wanted to know what happened in the game?
Yeah, it was great what color are your eyes hazel green or plain green?
Plain bright green, what happened n the game?
Yeah it was great...
Sometimes I let my eyes do that talking in regards to meeting new people and stuff
I know.  There is a lot of things going on in the situation when you stare at people
eYah.  It is almost like I have some sort of mindpower over them
Right.  Its so cool and profound
It really is.  Your so observant about my abilities
Thanks I know
I was looking at all these different shirts, there were too many choices!
Did you not buy any shirts, then?
No, I bought this really nice polo shirt that's black and white.
That sounds really nice, can't wait to see it.
I'll see you tomorrow, I'll be wearing it, so watch out.
I will, I'll see you tomorrow.
I need a new shirt.
Yea you are sweating and I see it.
Kinda gross right?
What's the style? Conservative.
Yep exactly.
Alright you got this one it's black.
I am going to introduce you to my friend Ash because I think he will be able to help you.
I don't know if I want to talk to him about my girlfriend cheating on me, it's embarrassing.
The same thing happened to me with Leila when I found out she went out with somebody else and Ash gave me some good advice.
He didn't tell anyone else about it?
He never tells other people what we talk about, that's why I always confide in him when I have a problem and he always has good advice.
I guess I could try, he sounds like a nice guy.
So I threw a tantrum in the store.
And she still didn't buy you the dress?
Can you believe it. What does this mean?
It means your Mom's onto the whole tantrum scheme.
I had a tantrum in the store. I was yelling because my mom would not buy me a balloon.
That's not nice. If your mother didn't want to buy it, maybe she had a good reason.
No she is just cheap. It only cost $1.
Well, you should still listen to your mother and not get so angry.
Give me the candy bar!
No! Stop being such a little brat!
I will throw these eggs on the ground if I do not get it!
Would you stop it Bailey, please! You are embarrassing!
Not until I get my candy bar!
You will never get that candy bar if you keep acting like this!
I recently brought baseball gears for my kids.
How nice of you. Are they learning how to play baseball?
Yes. They've been watching a lot of baseball on TV lately, and ask if I can teach them about it.
That's sweet of you. Nice to see how supportive you are to your kids.
I just want to be a good parent to them.
That is a wonderful thing.
I don't want my kids to have the life I had.
You are good dad to them and very supportive of everything they do.
I do not want them to feel like they are not important, like my father did to me.
You coach their teams, read to them, talk to them, you are a great dad.
I want them to know they are my everything.
They know that you love them, by all the things you provide them.
I am really sad to see the kids go to away to college but I am okay with it.
But Robin, moving to Moscow for school is ridiculous.
I know. I tried to convince them that they can learn Russian history at home.
That's a little crazy. Harvard has a fantastic Russian history program.
But they wanted a real experience from Russians at home.
Understood. You are really a great mom by letting them move to Moscow.
I'm a little busy this week. I'll see if I can go.
You need to take more breaks. You're working too much.
I know, but I'm making a lot of money.
Whatever. How much money do you really need?
What are you doing on Friday?
I don't think I'm doing anything, but I'm not sure.
If you're not doing anything, do you wanna go watch a movie?
That would be great, I've been looking forward to watching a movie for months now.
Skylar asked me so I'm looking for others to come.
Well that's awesome I'm gonna make sure that I can make it so we all can hang out in a huge group.
Hey Skylar, do you have any plans for this weekend?
Not really. I might have a bbq this weekend.
That would be cool. Do you want to go to a movie on Friday?
Oh... ya, that would be cool. What do you want to watch?
I'm not sure, maybe the latest Bourne movie?
Ya that sounds good.
Guess what happened in class today
What?
The instructor asked us who wanted to go on a field trip
Did Quinn raise her hand?
No, so I had to hold it up for her!
I'm glad you did
I really want to go on this field trip and see the animals
I think it will be a nice time and we might even get to see some monkeys
I really love monkeys but tigers are my favourite
I like the meerkats too they are the cutest animals there
Hopefully we can see some hippos too
How did I miss having such a delicious dessert all these years. I can get this stuff all day.
Really, were you ever a child? We had pudding for lunch all the time.
No, my mom thought it was not healthy and she absolutely hated Bill Cosby.
Make sense but her dislikes should not be your dislikes. Just indulge!!
I am. I just loaded up on a variety of pudding flavours to catch up all the tasty delicious treats I missed out on.
Okay, now that is a little obsessive.
I accidentally pressed against Austin in the elevator.  I was so embarrassed.  I apologized for this accident.
I am sure he's fine with it.
He's so chill.  That's why he's one of my best friends.
I can't get over how you guys work in the same company and went to college together.
I've known him since elementary school.  He used to live two houses down from me.
He's like your little brother.
I had an awkward moment in the elevator today. It was so crowded that I accidentally bumped up against somebody.
Yikes, that's uncomfortable. Did you apologize?
Yes, but the person I bumped into was Austin.
Isn't Austin the name of a co-worker of yours?
Yeah, which makes it doubly awkward.
I am trying to exercise at home instead of going to the gym.
That is even harder. I can't do that I tend to get lazy
Yes it is kind of hard to discipline myself, especially when my exerciser is right next to my couch.
That couch sure to be very inviting, right?
Yes it is. That's why I put some exercising music on, so I can get motivated
I'm sure that helps a lot. A good beat should get you going.
I cant keep to a good routine
I know its tough to stick to a good exercise plan
especially at home
I can help you out with a few pointers if you like
I really would, I want to be serious about this
Well then, want me to come over this Saturday, I can bring some stuff
I'm starting to exercise at home.
How is it going so far?
It's been really hard.
Why is that?
It's hard to be disciplined when my tv and fridge are so close by when I'm working out.
It's even more difficult to exercise at my gym since there're fast food restaurants all around it.
I can't believe I'm finally graduating!
Congratulations. I know you've had a hard time getting through school.
Yeah, I've spent years and years studying. But it's that much more satisfying for all the hard work to pay off.
You should be proud of yourself.
I am.
I can't describe how happy I am on this day.
You worked hard on this.
Finally. It's our graduation day.
I am looking forward to a brighter future.
Congratulation to us friend.
Congratulations Quinn. Let's have a party later.
I have got a prank to really scare Quinn.
What are you going to do?
I am going to sneak into their house and hide in Quinn's closet.
That sounds a little overboard.
That's not all of it.  I'll have on a scary Halloween mask, and when Quinn opens the door, I'll jump out.
I wouldn't call that a prank; that could literally scare them to death.
I had such a good laugh today.
What was so funny?
I played a prank on Quinn.
What did you do?
I dressed up in a scary costume and screamed at him when he wasn't looking. He was so frightened.
You're so hilarious.
I want to prank Quinn. Any ideas on what can give him a good scare?
You should dress as a ghost and hide behind the door.
Quinn may not fall for that. Scaring him to death is my aim.
What are some of his fears?
I made the most amazing chocolate cake from scratch for Cameron.
Sounds delicious.  Did you tell Cameron you'd made it from scratch?
I did, and he really appreciated it.
I don't supposed there's any left? I'd love to have a piece.
Sorry, Cameron and I ate the whole thing.
Save a piece for me next time!
Today is my girlfriend birthday.
That is great, what are you doing for her?
I made her a cake.
That is amazing! I did not even know you can bake.
I searched for a recipe, made it from scratch
That is a good thing, I am sure she will be very impressed.
I spend about eight hours trying to make a cake from scratch, and there was a knock at the door
What is it you're baking?
A cake. I spent eight hours trying to get it together.
Why did it take so long?
It was my first time and I was trying to make it from scratch.
I'm sure it will be very good.
The cake is finally finished! What do you think?
It looks beautiful! If I didn't know any better I'd think a professional baked it.
I made it from scratch too.
If it tastes as good as it looks, we're in for a treat!
I knew if Quinn died, I would really miss her
Yes! it is so sad. You loved her so much
I fought for her life, but she eventually died on the operating table.
I feel so down right now. May she rest in peace!
There are a lot of issues going on that makes it hard for Quinn to live
oh yeah? What seems to be the problem?
Well for starters her vitals are terrible
Oh yeah that is important
Yeah Quinn just could not make it
Yeah she was a real trooper
I'm having a big party this weekend.
Cool, but isn't that a lot of work?
Yeah, that's why I hired a chef, so I can spend time with my guests.
Guess I will be seeing more of you at this party!
Yes, you will!
I can't wait!
I'm not going to be cooking for the party this time.
What is everybody going to eat if you're not cooking for us?
I hired a chef to cook for the party so I could socialize and spend time with all of the guests.
That makes sense. That's good delegating!
I hired a chef to cook for the party.
Why did you do that Kai? You're a good cook.
Well, I want to spend more time with my guest.
Ohh, will  there be some important guest?
Yes, some of them are my friends that I did not see for a long time.
Then you should really take your time Kai.
I finally decided to hire a chef.
I thought you loved cooking?
I do, but I want to spend more time with the guests.
That's great. Whatever makes you happy.
So how many guys have you dated?
What? I don't want to answer that.
Why not? It's not a big deal of a question.
Actually I find the question to be quite intrusive.
I think you are being too sensitive.
I'm going to walk away from this conversation right now.
I was only telling Jordan the truth. I didn't mean to make him feel uncomfortable.
You know that is a sore subject for Jordan.
I know but he needed to hear the truth from a friend.
The way he pushed away from you was frightening.
I hope Jordan is ok. It was said with love.
Give him a day or so to cool off before you approach him again.
I only have one light bulb left and all my lamps need new bulbs!
Oh no! That stinks
I would go get more but I can't leave the house because of the storm.
I can bring you one tomorrow if you don't make it to the store.
That would be awesome!
I'll touch base tomorrow to see if you still need the bulb.
My house is so creepy right now!
Why is your house creepy?
I only have one working light! I need to go to the store to get bulbs but I can't because of the storm.
What about your neighbour? Maybe they have extra.
That's a great idea. I'll put on a raincoat and walk over.
Okay, call me as soon as you get back!
That jerk down the street challenged me to a fight.
Was it the little kid with the big mouth?
Yes, and I did not want to knock the boy out.
What did you do?
I fought him but I handled him with kid gloves.
Oh wow.
Sometimes you gotta hold back.
I agree.
Yeah, I didn't want to knock the boy out so I took care of him with kid gloves.
What are kid gloves?
You are lucky I don't fee like slugging you today
why is that ?
I am putting on my kid gloves so the impact of hits are soften
wow you are so kind
So this means that any sort of punch I throw at you will hardly be felt
I sure am lucky
I figured if I used regular gloves I would have knocked him out cold.
Is that why you used smaller kid sized gloves?
Yeah, and I am glad I did not hurt him that much but it was still a bad fight for him.
I mean he wanted to fight you so that is on him.
Maybe I should not have taken it so easy on him though.
If you didn't take it easy, you would have just beaten him quick and he would not get any time to learn.
I lost my favourite toy.
Where did you lose it?
Here at home but I looked everywhere and couldn't find it.
Which toy was it?
My Doctor Barbie.
I'll help you look for it. We'll be Detective Barbies!
Have you seen my doll with the pink tiara, I can't find her.
No I haven't seen her, did you look in your toy box?
Of course, I have searched every room of this house and I can't find her.
Let me help you, where was the last place you've seen her?
When we were coming home from grandmas.
Ah ha, let's go look in the car!
I am disappointed because I could not find my precious toy.
Where did you last play with it?
I was at the backyard then.
Did you look there then?
That is the first place I looked at but it is not there.
Don't worry, it should just be around the house.
I got in a nasty fight with Taylor today.
I saw he had a bloody nose. What happened?
He was starting trouble with me again, so I picked him up by his hair and threw him to the ground.
You need to try and calm down, Austin. You could really hurt him next time.
I had the most delicious steak for lunch at Rory's Steakhouse.
Wow, Rory's Steakhouse? What was the special occasion?
I landed a new client. I'll be doing all the marketing for a new shoe brand.
Nice! What kind of shoes do they sell?
They're sandals made for hiking. It's a cool company. They donate 10% of their profits to charity.
I really love shopping with companies that help others.
Good job everyone, we closed the deal on that new client, the biggest deal yet for our company.
Hey that's fantastic news, we've been working on that contract for months now.
And its because of everyone's hard work that we got it done, so I am taking everyone out to lunch to celebrate.
I'll go let the folks on the first floor know.
Tell them to meet us at Frank and Son's Steakhouse, this deserves a special meal.
That's the fanciest steakhouse in town, everyone's gonna love it.
I added five new contacts to my phone last night.
You've always been good at making friends.
I just really like to talk to people. I went to a party after the concert, and everyone was so cool.
I guess talking about the concert was a good ice breaker.
It was. I just said, Hey, did you like the show? and the conversation got going.
I wish I was as outgoing as you are.
I just went to the after-concert party.
How was it?
It was great. I talked to a lot of people.
I wanted to go but I had to leave after the concert.
I made a lot of new friends there.
That's great! It must have been a great party.
The place was packed.  There were people everywhere and the music was so loud.
Did you go to a party last night?
It was the after-concert party.  They had a couple of bands playing.  People were nice and I made a lot of new friends.
That's good.  You are such a popular guy.  It's easy for you to make friends.
I think people are just comfortable around me.
You are easy going.
The party after the concert was off the chain.
Shit, I wish I could have went with you guys, but I had to work.
I met a bunch of new girls to hang out with.
You always make friends easy, that's a gift.
I made so many friends here.
It was a really good concert
Yes it was.
It was a fun show.
Yea loved the second song.
That's a classic.
It's no problem for me to finish the meal because I was so hungry
I've just started this new diet and I'm trying to lose weight before the summer so I can feel good
That makes sense, do you think you will be able to do it?
I've been doing pretty well on my own so far and I just need to work out more
We can work out together if you want to
That sounds great. Call me in the morning
I just heard back from my grandmother. I sent her a letter a few weeks ago.
That's nice that people still write letters. What did she say?
That everyone is doing fine . That my aunt just had a baby girl.
That's great. I love how your family is so close.
Yes, it's nice to have a big family.
I got the sweetest letter from my grandmother yesterday.
Oh how nice! Are you going to write her back?
Yes I wrote her back today.
Good for you! That is so nice that you have a good relationship with her.
Yes I feel very blessed to have such a loving family.
You should be!
I was delighted to see Remy.
She is a true friend.
I was so excited to see her, and she was so excited to see me that we couldn't sleep.
What did you do?
We saw sleeping pills on the table but decided not to take them.
You made the right decision.
I am so thrilled to see you! I don't think I am able to sleep tonight.
Me too! Maybe we can just stay up all night and catch up.
That's a great idea! But I think I'm getting tired.
Do you see that bottle of sleeping pills on top of the table?
Maybe they'll help us wind down and relax so we can get some rest.
I'm sure it will. Let's take one each right now, and say good night
Hey, thanks for letting me borrow your lighter. I never needed a lighter until today.
No problem. Did you like the medical marijuana we smoked?
For sure! I've only eaten edibles until now. I really liked the smoke, but I think I should stick to edibles.
I think I like edibles better, too. Some candy bars are really good!
Yeah, my favourite is chocolate. I wish I had some edibles right now.
Well, come on over! I have candy bars, gummies, and an infused pasta sauce.
Do you know who I borrowed this lighter from?
It was a blonde girl. I think her name is Kim.
Oh, okay. I wanted to return it. I never have one on me.
I think she works again tomorrow night if you stop by the bar.
Okay, cool. She was pretty cute. Maybe I'll chat her up a bit.
I'm pretty sure she has a boyfriend, but you can try.
I don't see anything wrong with my business model.
You're honestly telling me that you think what you do on campus is fine?
Yes, I offer a great service by tutoring for free!
But it's dishonest to say it's free when you ask the students to pay you after the fact.
It's their choice to tip me or not. Don't you understand?
I don't think the students would agree with that.
I'm going to give out free tutoring.
that is great! But you will charge after, right?
Yea just for the first and make money after.
That's good so they can see.
Exactly it's marketing.
That's what we do!
I am offering my services on the area and is being really good.
Really, what are you doing?
I am offering free tutoring services!
Oh wow! How does it work?
I attract student's by offering them free tutoring services and after a short time I start to charge them for the service.
Oh nice that's a cool idea and nice for the students!
Carson has been really struggling lately.
Does she not have enough money or something?
Yeah, she's trying to work but school is so demanding, so I decided to cover her rent.
That is really nice of you, can you handle it?
Oh yeah, it isn't that big of a deal and I am happy to help.
That is really awesome Riley.
I helped Carson pay off some of his bills. He's struggling to make end's meet while he studied to become a doctor.
He'll be making the big bucks when he gets out.
Maybe.  He has a lot of loans to repay.
The debt is harsh.
He's so in debt.  He says he doesn't think he could pay it off in thirty years.
That sounds like a lot
I know you have been struggling financially.
Is it that obvious?
Well when you are eating ramen for every meal.
I just can't keep up with the expenses, I'm struggling.
Well let me pay for everything around the house so you can save up some money and get back on track.
I can't believe it, you are a real hero.
This is what Skylar made for his dad for father's day.
His hand prints? That is so cute. Where did he do it?
His kindergarten class had parents come into their art class to help make them.
Why did they need the parents come in to do it?
It required adults to press the kid's hands into the clay on the table to get the imprint deep enough.
Oh, okay. A lot of physical interaction so parents would be necessary.
You should have seen Skylar's face today during art!
Ha, I can only imagine, what did you do this time?
I needed a hand impression for my clay art project!
So you took her hands and pressed them into the clay?
That I did, she did not like the feel of it one bit.
Well, I wouldn't either haha!
I just made a new art project using Taylor's hand. I made an impression in the clay with her hand.
That sounds really interesting. What are you going to do with it?
It's going to represent the work of the common worker. Showing hands of many.
Could I be a part of it?
Sure. Come over tomorrow and I will use your hand too.
That fall almost killed me.  I will never do that again.
What did you do? What happened?
I was climbing a rock wall and didn't have my safety equipment on.  I fell and got hurt pretty badly.  My back really hurts.
Damn, why did you not wear your safety equipment.  You should have known better than that.
I wasn't thinking.  I thought that I would be okay.
Never do that again!  You are a nut!  Safety first.
I'm recovering from my injuries.
How did you get injured?
I went rock climbing and fell.
Did you wear safety equipment?
I didn't wear safety equipment. That's why my injuries were significant.
I hope you'll get well soon.
That was a brutal fall.  I could have killed myself.
Well, you are not dead.  What happened to you?
My friend, Alex, and I went rock climbing without safety equipment.  I was right behind him.  Then I lost my grasp on the rock and fell.
How far did you fall?
Too far.  It must have been 20 feet.  Luckily I landed on a grassy patch below.  There was a little crater where my body hit the earth.
That sounds bad.
I've been having some difficulties dealing with my upstairs neighbour the past few weeks.
I can relate. I know exactly how hard it can be.
They have been causing a racket for hours. And the noise was really loud too.
If you're this upset about it, it must have been really bad.
I felt the noise reverberating in my ears and got a headache. It sounds like he's constantly throwing incredibly heavy metal objects against the wall.
I never imagined it would be that bad. But if it continues you might need to intervene.
Could you quiet it down, Kendall.
What's your problem?
You're giving me a headache with all that racket.
I have to practice my cheerleading.
In the house?  Go outside.
It's raining and this is the only place with room to do my flips along with my cheers.
Cant you take a break from practicing the drums
No Sky, I got a gig coming up I gotta be perfect
You're giving me the biggest headache
Go for a walk then I need to practice
This place is mine too and you've been doing it for hours
Fine ill go get some lunch
I just handed in my test one hour early.
Why the rush?
I just found the questions very easy. I even made sure to double-check my answers before submitting it.
Sounds like you prepared well for that one.
I spent all week studying for that test.
I know you will ace it.
I finished my test early because I studied a lot for the exam.
Are you sure you answered all the questions correctly?
I reviewed all the answer again before turning it in.
You'll probably ace that test. When do you find out your grade?
I really hope so. And I find out on Monday.
That was such an easy test.
I feel like I flunked it.
Well I studied for a month.
I just studied the night before.
When I study for a long time, it makes the test so easy!
I need to take your advice!
Riley has been watching me like a hawk today.
Me too, she is taking the job too seriously.
It's not like if anything breaks it comes out of her pay checks.
That's a great point, I didn't think of that.
Hopefully after this week, things will get back to normal.
I hope so, because things are getting pretty weird right now.
Riley has been breathing down my neck lately.
What do you mean?
He's in charge of the merchandise, so he's very strict with how we handle it to make sure nothing gets damaged.
Riley has a lot of responsibility now. You should cut him some slack.
I flew out to see my girlfriend for the holidays.
Does she live far away?
Yeah, it was a five hour flight.  But it was worth it.
You had a good time with her?
It was awesome!  I missed her so much.
Long distance relationships can be tricky.  I'm glad yours is working out.
My dad is going to kill me! I left the tie that grandpa gave him at the dance.
You can ask on Monday if they found it or have your mom call Mr. Jones.
I hadn't thought of that.
They have that lost and found box up at the office.
Man my dad is going to kill me.
Why what happen?
I lost my dad special tie, I think back at the dance but it wasn't there when I went back for it.
Man that really sucks, what does it look like I'll keep an eye out
I'm going to be in huge trouble with my dad.
What exactly did you do?
I lost a tie at the dance this weekend.
Hopefully someone found it and turned it in.
That's what I'm hoping for, if not I'll have to buy a new one.
You'll have to wait until Monday to find out.
I'm doing deep breathing techniques to stay calm for the exam.
I'm glad. Don't worry.
It's the most important test of my life. I am doing everything I can to stay calm.
You will do well.
I hope so. I am prepared.
Then you are right to just try to stay calm and focus on the test.
I really want some ice cream, do you want any?
Yeah sure, what kind is it?
It is chocolate chip cookie dough.
Oh that is my absolute favourite, can I get a big bowl for it?
Sure, we need to clear room out of my freezer anyway.
Awesome, I love ice cream and I am glad you had some.
I had an ice cream day. I can't believe I ate a whole container!
What? How big?
Oh about a pint or so. But I was really in the mood for an indulgence treat.
Well if you only do it once in a while, I'm sure it's fine.
Yes, I rarely eat sugar but I needed some sweet comfort food.
Ice cream works for me too.
Sammy accidentally punched me in the face, but I forgave him.
Were you badly hurt?
I had some bad bruising the next day.  My right cheek swelled up.  I iced it all day and it feels and looks better.
Take some pain killer to help the pain and inflammation.
I did that already.  I just want to sleep.
Sleep helps with everything.
I've spent the last hour icing my eye, because my friend accidentally punched me in the face!
Oh my gosh, how did that happen?
He spun around and threw his hand up to point at something and my eye got in the way!
Oh my goodness. Did how did he feel?
He apologized to me a lot. He felt awful.
I'm glad it was just an accident and that he did feel badly about it.
I'm sorry I punched you in the face, I wasn't looking
it's ok. my nose only bled a little bit
I guess it just looked way worse than everyone was telling me
Nosebleeds tend to be like that because of all the arteries in them
I guess that's a good thing then
It was so great being able to visit my friend this weekend
Yeah it's always nice catching up with friends
It's definitely harder when they're in different cities, but sometimes you have to make it work
I totally agree. Especially if it's a good friend
Yeah this was one of my closest friends actually
Well it sounds like it was a trip well spent
I'm feeling really frustrated with my times on the track team.
Why is that?
Well, I've been practicing my sprints for half a year now, but my times are still really bad.
You just need to follow a healthier diet, the way that Coach James tells you to.
That's a good point. I've been eating too much junk food.
Junk food weighs you down and keeps you from performing at your best.
I can't believe I'm still so slow
I think you should be proud that you've been trying to get faster
I know, but I've been working for half a year and have barely made progress
Sometimes these things take time. Don't be too hard on yourself
I really appreciate that advice
That's what friends are for! You'll get better with time
I took Addison to the museum.
How did that go?
I showed Addison my favourite painting.
Did she like your choice?
She was not sure what to make of it and quizzed me about it.
That was diplomatic of her.
I thought that painting was really nice.
Did you? It was a nice piece of abstract art.
Yea, the colour mixture was really nice. Well balanced.
I completely agree. It was one of my favourites.
I'm glad that you liked it. I thought it was very well done.
Yes, I completely agree. I can't wait to see more works by this artist.
What do you think of the painting, Addison?
I'm not sure; I'd like to hear your thoughts.
It's very colourful and symbolizes man's struggle against the universe.
Just seems like a lot of random lines to me.
Well, it's open to interpretation.
I guess I have a lot to learn about art.
I want to celebrate the holiday with my friends.
Me too. How about we have a Christmas party?
Yes. I will organize a Christmas party for us all.
That's a great idea.
Please announce it to our friends so that they can all attend.
Sure thing, Sydney.
I wanted to celebrate the holiday with friends.
So what did you do?
I had a Christmas party.
Did you have fun?
Guess what I found yesterday while walking!
Oh tell me, this is going to be good!
I found a four leaf clover!
Awesome, isn't that a sign of good luck?
Yeah my parents always told me this when I was younger, so Im happy
That's great, make sure you keep it safe!
Take a look at this four leaf clover.
You like to find them don't you.
Well, they bring good luck.
Do you believe that?
When I was younger, my parents would give them to me and tell me that.
You are pretty lucky.
I'm glad I made a deposit today.
Lucky you, since you found all that money.
Maybe this will change the luck in my life.
You're going to go on a long stretch of great things happening.
I really do hope that's true.
Just keep believing and you'll see.
Hey I have good new, I found some money!!!
What do you mean? What did you do with it?
I found some cash, so I went to put it in our bank account!
Oh cool, now we have some more money in the new account, awesome!
Yeah, it was an smart move!
Sure it was my friend, thanks!
I think it would be a good idea to save it before I spend it
You do have a bad habit of spending money right when you get it
This way I can save up for that new bracelet I've seen at the store
It was so pretty I think I'm actually jealous
I had a great turn of fortune.
Tell me about it.
I found some cash.
You found cash?
It was right there in the street, in a plain brown paper bag, and I took the money to the bank and deposited it into an account we just opened up.
That was a wise decision.
So I tried to get some sun yesterday, boy was it hot I needed to go inside with the AC running
I bet these summer days are horrid
Yea, I just wanted to get some sun but it was so hot.
Maybe next time do it in the afternoon it will be not so hot.
Gosh it's so hot out here.  It's getting harder and harder to dig this 6 foot by 3 foot hole, 6 whole feet deep.
Well, once we get done out here, I have a surprise for you.
Really?  What is it?
Stick your head in the door right there in the front of the house and feel how cold that AC is.
Woooow.  That air conditioning feels great, Kim.
Yeah it does.  That's gonna be part of your Job. Well done.
It's a real scorcher today. I think we're in the triple digits.
Ugh, I hate being outside when it's this hot.
The air conditioning is on in my house, if you want to go inside and cool off.
That's a great idea. Let's get indoors!
Hey do you want to go inside? I'm hot.
I'm hot too, does your house have air conditioning?
Yeah you can tell that it's on from here.
Oh yeah I see it. Is that a new AC?
Yeah it was cheap.
That's cool that you saved money.
I finally got some good sleep last night.
What did you do differently?
I was having trouble sleeping all week, so I went to get some medication for it.
So I'm guessing it worked?
It definitely did. I'm gonna use the medication from now on.
Is there any way you can let me have some?
I just picked up some sleep aid pills from the pharmacy. I hope they work.
You having trouble sleeping lately?
Yeah, I don't know why. I'm so tired and I get in bed and I'm wide awake.
Have you changed your routine. Eating late or something like that.
No, it's weird. It just started about a week ago. I just can't fall asleep.
I slept relatively well last night!
That's a relief. I know you've also had trouble getting good sleep.
Thanks. I can't tell you how great I feel!
Hopefully it lasts this time and you can fix it for good!
I've been doing so horribly in school, it's really making me rethink things.
There's still time to get back on track, let this be a learning experience.
My teacher had a serious conversation with me about it and it made me really disappointed in myself.
It's normal to feel that way, just try your best
I plan on it, I have a plan of action I just hope I could stick to it and get my grades up.
I have faith in you, you got this.
I have to try harder in class.
How are your grades?
I've missed several tests, and my teacher warned me already.
That sounds terrible you should study more.
I will, otherwise I could flunk the class.
Do you need any help?
Did you  like the song I played after school.
I did like the rhythm, you are a great player.
Thank you, years of practice.
I just have a doubt about the song you where playing.
Yes, do tell me.
What is the name of that song?
I don't know this song and it's so hard to play just looking at the music.
We'll get it. Maybe we could search it online and listen to it, that might help.
Ok. Would you grab my phone and see if you can find this song for me?
I don't see your phone. Where is it?
Oh, its in my coat pocket. Here you go.
I google it first, but there has to be a music site I could check.
I worked at a dog shelter today.
I didn't know you were working there.
Actually I volunteer. I love dogs but I can't have them in the apartment.
Oh what a great idea to be able to be around animals.
It seriously works, too. I feel like some of them are mine so it's always uplifting to go there.
That's generous too. Dogs need people as much as we need them.
I've been so frustrated that I can't have a dog at my apartment. So I started volunteering at the shelter.
What a good idea. You'll definitely get to see a lot of dogs there.
Exactly. And the dogs there are really wanting attention, so I get to play with all of them.
You probably wish you could take them all home with you.
Seriously!! It's a good thing I'm not allowed to do that!
That's why I don't think I could work there. 'Id bring them all home.
I feel so wonderful and helpful at the animal shelter.
It sounds like the perfect way to spend an afternoon.
So upset that my landlord won't allow me to have pets in my apartment.
Well, at least you get to play with the animals in the shelter.
That's true, you know how much I love animals.
I absolutely do Quinn.
I love dogs so much, but since I can't have them in my apartment I volunteer at a dog shelter.
That's awesome dude! Which one?
The one on 5th street.
I think that's great, not only will you get your dog fix but you are helping out those poor dogs.
I know! I want to take them all home but I'm just glad I can help them out while I'm there
You are the sweetest person ever!
I really can't make heads or tails of this report.
I thought you knew the reports like the back of your hand.
I do, but this is a new one, from the new boss.
Just ask him what this report is in reference to.
I'm worried he'll think that I'm an idiot since I've done reporting for so long.
If you act like you know, but you don't, you will end up looking stupid.
Are we required to report to work going forward?
Yeah, it's part of the new policy here.
I didn't do it today.
You don't know how to do it?
I'm not really sure. I'm gonna take a close look at the report.
Just tell me if you need help on how to do it.
This report is very confusing and I have been going over it for an hour now.
Isn't that your job to report the day's earnings and other information?
Yes but I feel like I'm missing something.
Well it looks like someone forgot to add earnings from yesterday so that is why it looks so messed up.
Thanks, that is what I was hoping for.
No problem, I am glad to help anytime.
I got a new duty at work.
Congratulations. Is that a good thing?
Yeah, it's good but I have to look really closely at new reports.
Sounds a bit tedious.
I found some mistakes that I have to report to my boss. Wish me luck.
Good luck.
There was a homeless man on the sidewalk yesterday with holes in the bottom of his shoes. It was so sad.
That's terrible. Homelessness is a tragedy in a country as rich as ours.
I know. I can't imagine having the means, and not helping others. I couldn't just let the guy sit there on the street without decent shoes.
I feel the same way. What did you do?
I took him to the nearest shoe store so he could get some decent shoes. It's just the right thing to do.
You're a really good person to take your time and money to help that man.
I helped a homeless man today.
How did that come about?
He was on the street and his toes were coming out of his shoes, so I took him to a shoe store.
How did that help him?
Well, I bought some shoes for him. Did you think I just dropped him at the store?
No, knowing you I figured you bought him shoes.  I was just trying and failing to be clever.
Hey Jordan look at this.
That's pretty!
It is such a nice painting.
I wonder how long it took to paint.
Way longer than I would try to do it, haha.
Haha, yeah me to!
I gave Austin detention today to teach him a lesson.  He's my favorite student so that was difficult to do.
Did he mess up?
He was acting up in class and wouldn't stop talking.
That's not good.  He was disrupting the class.  He deserves detention.
That's why I did that.  He needs to learn that there's a time and place for everything.  Break was over.
You need to retain control of the class.
I had to give my favorite student, Austin, detention today.
What did he do?
He's been misbehaving in class and he's not listening to my warnings.
I guess some kids learn the hard way.
Yeah. He's still my favorite student, though. Just don't tell him that!
I felt bad, but was forced to give my favorite student Austin a detention this morning.
That must have been difficult to do. What was he doing?
He spoke out in class twice, and I warned him to raise his hand. He did it a third time and I had to give detention.
Well the good thing is, he will learn his lesson.
Unfortunately it has to come to this sometimes.
That's ok. No one ever said teaching was easy, that's for sure.
You know how I've been looking for something to do during the lockdown?
Yeah, you kept talking about starting a new hobby.
Well, I think I've found my new calling. I've been getting into gardening lately.
That sounds great. You have a big backyard too, so there's plenty of room to plant things.
I've been thinking about growing some herbs and veggies in my backyard, is that crazy?
Not at all! My brother grows a bunch of stuff and he makes the best pickles out of them!
Really? Do you think he can help me out? I don't know anything about plants!
Yeah, I'll text him. He loves talking about plants so I bet he'd be happy to help.
Yay! Finally I can be an adult and have a productive hobby!
Just promise you'll share some of your harvest with me!
I need something new to occupy my time. I think I've come up with a good idea.
Oh, you have? That's great. What did you settle on?
I want to get a garden going. Tomatoes, carrots, that sort of thing. I've wanted to for quite some time.
I think that's a nice idea. That would be very relaxing for you.
Yes. And it would eat up a lot of my spare time.
It sure would. And at the end, you wind up with food!
I was lucky, let me tell you that I lost my keys and for some curious reason Jordan found it and gave it to me!
Oh wow, it's nice he found it, what would happen if you lose the keys and never find it?
I have no idea, big problem I guess. Thankfully he was there and gave it to me.
You better be more careful next time and pay more attention to the keys.
I promise I will, I already learned the lesson.
Good, be careful and pay attention to your keys all the time!
I finally told Ash about everything. She cried so much.
It's good that you are finally being honest.
Yeah, she needed to know what really happened. I don't want a relationship built on lies.
Hopefully, she will find peace with the information now and forgive me.
We will see what she'll do 
I finally broke up with Ash today.
Wow, when did you do that?
After school, before I headed home for the day.
So, how did he take it?
He cried and was pretty upset, but I think he'll be OK.
Well, I'm glad you're out of that relationship. You can do better than him.
I have been in the studio making hits.
Oh, nice, what kind of music?
I've been making some EDM beats that are really cool.
I listened to your old tracks and they were pretty awesome.
Yeah, but just wait until I drop my next album as it will be fire!
I can't wait and hope you let me know when it's released.
Hi! I haven't seen you in years!
Jan! Aren't you a famous singer now?
Oh, a song I made is popular, but I'm still Jan.
Yes, but now you are a star!
I guess that's true. It's still just me, though.
You were always famous to me!
I can't believe my song is a hit.
Number one on the charts.
I hear it everywhere I go.
Your song and you are famous.
It is so gratifying to sing a song that you wrote and have people like it.
I can imagine.
Well Riley finally called me.
Oh thank god!
Yeah I finally was able to trace the call from the number she called me from.
I am just glad to hear that she is okay.
Me too! I have never been so relieved.
I can only imagine.
Have been disturbed since Riley is not home.
Call her.
I just traced her call now.
So what did she say?
She told me she's fine.
That's okay then.
I just got off the phone with Riley.
Where was she?
She was getting her hair done and had her phone off.
Did you tell her how worried we were?
No, but she apologized for worrying me.
That's good.
I don't mind watching the kid for the day if you need me to.
Thank you so much, that would really help.
I just don't want you to be stressed out or worried since you have this job interview.
I really appreciate that, I hope I get the job.
Well just make sure you ace that interview and I'll make sure the baby is safe and sound so you don't have to worry about it.
I can't thank you enough and will make sure I return the favor.
I'm so sorry you had a bad day Carson. Here, let me put my arm around you.
Thanks Quinn. You're a really caring person. I'll be fine though.
Well if you want to talk about it I'm here for you.
I know. Right now I just want to relax and enjoy this delicious looking dinner you prepared.
You got it. I got a nice bottle of Pinot Noir to go with it.
That's perfect. I'll open it for us.
I hope Carson is feeling better. He was really tired from work at dinner.
Carson's been having a lot of long days on the job. He sounded stressed last time we spoke.
I put my arm around him at dinner and tried to comfort him.
That was a really nice gesture. I'm sure he appreciated it.
I got tickets to see the Backstreet Boys!
Really?  How did you do that?  They are so expensive!
I borrowed some money from friends.
I hate borrowing money from people.
I know but it's the Backstreet Boys!  It will be totally worth it I promise.
I do really love the Backstreet Boys!
I paid so much for those tickets.
You're are so bad.
Why? It's expensive.
Yea that's why you are broke.
Relax man I'm good.
Go get a job dude.
I did something I probably shouldn't have. I borrowed money from some friends.
Why did you have to borrow money?
I hate to admit it but I bought concert tickets. I had to borrow because we're broke.
Well, if you're broke, maybe you don't need to go to concerts. Use the money to buy food or pay bills.
See, why do I tell you anything. You don't understand.
Oh, I understand, alright. Grow up, Sydney.
I took my dog to the hospital today.  He was so badly hurt.
Poor thing. That's so sad.
Max got run over by a car.  He had a broken leg.
How's is he doing now?
The vet had to perform surgery on Max's leg to fix it.  It'll take some time for him to recover.
I am glad you took care of him.
aw poor dog
woof woof
you will be okay dog
woof
here you go all better
woof woof woof
I went on a date with Remy.
Oh really? how was it?
It was really fun Remy and I really hit it off
Where did you go?
Just for a movie and dinner
What movie did you watch?
I really like Remy and I am glad that he invited me along on the trip.
I think Remy knew that the two of you would hit it off.
We definatley did! It was so perfect and harmonious.
You two seem to have a lot in common.
We share so many similar interests and beliefs.
You two were meant for each other.
I hate not having a driver's license.
How do you get to work?
I have to walk a mile to get there.
I know that has got to be hard on you.  How in the world do you do it?
I am use to it know.  I have walked it for over a month now.
I bet your tired by the time you get to work.
Hey bill, haven't seen you round here
Where ya heading?
Work, walk here twice a day
Oh still at the ol Robinsons spot
Yup Monday through Saturday
Glad to see that place is still around
I am tired.
Why do you still walk to work?
I like the extra exercise.
True. Staying in shape is important.
I passed down my sentence today in the court case and i know that guy did not care about what he did.
He deserves to be locked up for a long time.
When you callously take someone’s life over money then you deserve life in prison.
I agree, he should never see the light of day.
Sometimes my job is worth it for being able to put away monsters like that.
You are a great judge that’s for sure.
I had some people come visit me today
that's nice, who came by?
Kendall came and visited me, but I could not get up to greet her since I am still so ill
I understand, what did she do when she saw you?
she knelt next to me so I didn't have to talk loudly, so nice, right?
yeah, it is very nice of her!
Its so amazing that I have the greatest friends ever. I need to send out some thank yous.
That is so sweet. We are all behind you, Janny!!
I am so damn tired to write these notes. Its these damn meds.
No worries. I can help you write them.
You are too sweet, Kendall. I have to go out and buy the cards.
I can make them with my Cricket machine. No worries.
The strings of wives have bankrupted me.
How many have you had?
My fourth one just filed for divorce.  She's such a thief.  She stole everything from me.
What did she steal?
She got addicted to drugs and sold every single one of my valuables.  I came home from a business trip and my stuff was gone.
Oh my god.
I can't get this marriage thing right.
I came to that conclusion about you two wives ago.
After I divorced Joan I still thought I could find love again.
And again and again and again.
I have been married four times.
You are on a bad streak.
I believe that I will never have a successful marriage after four attempts!
Some men are just unlucky with women.
Nobody could be that unlucky! I don’t think women even like me.
That’s ridiculous! They married you, so they must have liked you.
But they never wanted to stay with me and share a life together.
Maybe you should take time to be alone for a while.
I still can't believe I am on my fourth marriage.
I know, you never seem to have luck with that.
Yeah, after divorcing for the first time I never had thought I would marry another three times.
Well, you can't always predict the future.
I know, I just hope this one works out.
As long as you are willing to really work hard, you will have a chance.
I divorced my first wife 10 years ago.
So you're onto your second marriage?
Actually after my divorce, I married three times.
Wow! That's a lot of ex-wives.
You have nothing to worry about the exam because you studied so hard for it
I know, I'm just worried about failing it because it's 75 percent of my grade
you always get above 95 percent on all your tests so I'm sure you will be okay
I guess you're right. lets go get something to eat then
sounds like a great idea
Poor Cameron is freaking out about the exam we have coming up.
Are you helping her study?
I think she's fine. It's more that she is just panicking so I talked her down a bit.
Wow. I feel bad she gets so upset.
Yeah, she's a good student so I don't know why she worries.
I am sure you got her to relax.
I told Cameron to relax because she was worried
I hope you were able to calm her down
Yes, she was just worried about her upcoming exams
Oh! I understand why now
I am both sad and tired today.
Why, what happened last night.
I got a pet bird a few weeks ago and it would keep me up late with all its singing so I returned it today.
Did you put a blanket over its cage like your supposed to so it goes to sleep?
No, I felt bad about it being covered and now I feel bad cause I returned it, but I just couldn't take the singing any more.
This is why not everyone should have a pet bird, next time just get a house plant.
I thought I was going to be able to have a cool pet but that was a no
What happened to the bird that you got?
Although it was a cool bird it would not let me sleep.
How did it stop you from sleeping?
I’m a light sleeper and lots of noises of all types wake me up.
So what did you do with the bird?
Work was so fun yesterday, we went to the natural history museum.
That's my favorite museum. What did you all do?
The kids liked the fossils the most, so we spent a lot of time there.
That's cool. I always liked the rocks and minerals.
We looked at those, too.
Sounds like a great day.
We had a really fun time at the museum today.
We? Who else did you go with?
I took the kids with me. They love fossils and dinosaurs, so I knew they'd enjoy themselves.
I don't know what it is with kids and dinosaurs, but they're fascinated by all those prehistoric animals.
Me and the kids had a great time today.
Where did you guys go?
We went to the museum. I thought it would be educational and fun.
What was their favorite exhibit at the museum? Was it the mummy?
Actually it was the fossils. We spent over an hour looking at them.
That's great! I was always partial to the mummy but I'll look for the fossils next time.
You know I play the piano.
Of course, you've played for me before.
Did you know that I won an award?
I did not know that.
When I was younger, I won the award for outstanding pianist under 21 in the City of Chicago.
Well, I knew you were good.
My son Cameron won an award last night.
Congratulations. What award did he win?
He's an excellent piano player and won a tournament.
Oh wow! Can I hear him play one day?
Yes. Come by the house this weekend.
My friend Cameron is an excellent piano player he has even won an award.
What award did he win?
I don't know what they call it but it was for a competition at a music school.
That's pretty impressive what does he play.
Classical and church music mostly I guess.
Yeah not a lot gigs out there for piano players I guess.
You have been practicing piano so  much lately are you having a competition
No, I'm just trying to practice so I won't lose my skills
I do the same thing with my violin sometimes when I have free time
yea, I would hate to forget how to play piano since I love it so much
You should have heard him play.
Was he really that good?
Yes, Cameron is the best I have ever heard.
Does he enter competitions to show off his skills?
Yeah, he just won an award.
That's cool, I will have to listen to him.
I am really struggling at work
I feel you on that. Are you okay?
yeah it just feels like a lot right now
I understand. I know you have been going through some tough times.
Yeah, but at least I have a job! I'm grateful from that point of view
Yeah, lots of people are out of work right now.
I'm doing horrible at work. I need to find a new job.
What is wrong? I thought that was your dream job.
Well it was , but my boss is very demanding. He expects me to work 60 hours a week or more.
That's a lot of hours for any job.
But I do love the work. And they plan on hiring help soon which will take some of the load off of me.
Maybe you should wait and see if things get better.
I finally saved some money and bought a used car.
That is awesome, what did you buy?
I bought a 2015 jeep cherokee.
What color is it and how many miles?
It is black and it only had 25000 miles on it somehow.
That is a pretty good deal I must say.
I just got a new car!
Cool, you deserve it.
Yeah I have been working hard,
So you bought it cash?
Yeah, I went to a used car dealer and haggled for it.
Congratulations!
All my family knows him, he is my best friend.
He is a good person!
I brought him home today.
What do your parents think of him?
They see him as a good boy too.
O.K., Jesse this is my house.
It's nice.
Well, come on in.
Where is everybody?
Work, school.  They'll be home soon.  I've told them all about you, and they can't wait to meet you.
I'm looking forward to meeting them too.
Can you hand me my phone? I just heard a text go off.
You're driving, don't you think you should pay attention to the road?
I didn't ask for your opinion, I will just reach back and get it myself.
Casey! Watch out for the stop sign!
That came out of no where! I never thought I would hit the stop sign!
Dude, I told you to pay attention to the road instead of your phone!
So, last night I played chicken with a friend of mine on the road.
That doesn't sound smart.  Is that why you have a cut on your head?
Yeah, I had to swerve into the ditch to avoid hitting them.
Wow.  Is your car ok?
It has a crunched in front bumper from the accident.
Well, at least you didn't get more seriously injured.
It was awesome that Kendall was able to send me that email.
Her email was a lifesaver for our assignment.
Will have to do something to thank her.
We can take her out to lunch.
That’s a great idea, I’ll text and ask her.
Let me know what she says.
Even though I've moved across the country, I call my mom all the time to check up on her.
It's important to stay connected to your family.
She's so supportive of me.
You're mom is the nicest person.  She's supportive of everyone.
I feel bad for living so far away, but  it's where my work is located.
I am sure she understands.
I really miss my mom!
Where did your mom go too?
She moved across the country.
I can see why you miss her a lot
I call her often tho!
That is good.
Bailey you are really good at basketball.
Thanks I have fun playing it.
Have you ever played on a basketball team?
No I just play with my friends for fun.
I really think you should play for a basketball team because you would make a great player.
Thanks maybe I will try.
Are you going to play any sports this year, Bailey?
I don't know, I don't feel like I'm good enough at anything.
You have to be joking, you're really good at basketball!
You think so?
Definitely, you should try out for it.
Alright, I guess I should.
And here's your orange juice.
Thanks, my favorite drink.
Now I'll just put the jug back in the fridge.
You knocked over my glass.
No problem; I'll clean that right up.
And more juice please.
What is wrong with me, I keep knocking things over these days.  I just knocked over a glass of milk that spilled out everywhere.
How did you do that?
I was putting away a jug of orange juice and knocked over the glass inside the refrigerator.
Man that sucks but I will help you clean it up.
Yeah I want to enjoy my huge glass of orange juice.  I've been craving it all day.
No problem.  We will clean it right up.
I did a lot of grocery shopping today.
That is nice.
It was my wife's car that I had with me and the bags she had were the tiny ones. The groceries wouldn't fit in them.
Why did you take your wife's car?
I had no gas in mine. It's okay, I just had to put the groceries differently.
Ah I see.
I couldn't fit any of the groceries in those tiny bags at the store.
Well how did you get the food home?
I grabbed some boxes from the store room and filled them up without any trouble.
I never understood why grocers just throw away the boxes and put food in bags. It makes no sense.
Some stores have people bag their own or use the store boxes, but it's not common practice.
you're always coming up with better ways of doing things. They should implement it all the time!
I can't believe I bought so much groceries.
How did they all fit in the reusable bags you use?
I actually had to put some of the fruits in my purse.
I bet some of the customers were looking at you weird.
Yeah, but I already paid for them so it didn't matter.
Your purse also ended up smelling nicer I guess.
Hey girlie what are you doing?
I am trying to put these groceries in a bag to take to my mom.
Would you like some help?
Yes please.
Ok look we can put all the large grocery items on the bottom and put the smaller groceries on the top.
Thank you so much for getting all the groceries in the bag.
Thank you so much for helping me out. I really appreciate it.
It's no problem. I remember what it was like being without a car.
Yeah, it's not easy. And I really wanted to go to this fair.
Me, too. I'm glad you called me before I made other plans.
So am I. You're the only friend who was willing to help me out.
I'm probably the only friend who wanted to go to the fair, too.
I called everyone to try to get a ride to the fair.
I wish you could have come. It was really fun!
Me too! I called some people two or three times, but no one was willing to come get me all the way out here.
Where is your mom? Could she not bring you into town?
No, she always leaves me out here with no way into town. She went bowling with my aunt this evening.
I'm sorry. You can ride with me if we go back tomorrow.
The fair was in town.  I called my friends to give me a ride to the fair.
Did you go with them?
My friend, Scott, gave us a ride.  He dropped us off but had to get to work.  It was just Alicia and me who went to the fair.
Did you have fun?
It was so much fun.  We got on all the rides.  The lines were long but not terrible.  We've been to the fair every year since we were kids.
Is this the fair that came to town every year?
Hey, I need a ride to the fair! Are you going as well?
Uh, I'm really not in a fair mood, right now.
Oh, come on! I've called all my friends already! I'll let you have the prizes I win!
I've seen you play those games. But alright. I'll pick you up in 20 minutes.
Yay! Thanks! You'll have a great time, I promise!
I hope so. And you owe me.
Robin called me and told me how she desperately needed a job.
What did you tell her? Were you able to help?
It took a few days and a little convincing but my boss is willing to give her a try, he just wants to talk to her first.
Well, that's good. Do you think she will work out okay? You know it may reflect poorly on you if she quits or doesn't work out.
Yes, I know. I was a bit concerned about that but in the end I wanted to help, you know?
I understand. You're a good person Riley. You did the right thing.
I am such an airhead.
Why would you say such a thing?
I was sent me to the store to buy ingredients for the cookies we were baking.
So why are you an airhead?
I had to make a second trip to the store after I forgot to buy the butter.
You are an airhead.
I was already at the store and forgot something.
What did you forget?
I forgot to buy butter which we needed to make cookies.
Did you have to drive back to the grocery store?
I had to.
So if you bought the butter in the end, does it mean  I will be able to taste your cookies this afternoon ?
I went to the store to get all the ingredients to make these chocolate chip cookies and forgot the butter.
Oh no! What did you substitute the butter with?
I didn't. I went right back to the store and bought the butter.
That's the worst. That's an extra hour going back to the store and driving back home.
By the time I got back from the store the second time I didn't even feel like baking.
So you didn't even get to have the delicious cookies you wanted to begin with?
The doors close at 7pm so I told my friends to be there around 5.
Is it at the club by work?
Yeah, a bunch of my friends will be there and I'm looking forward to seeing them there.
Sounds like you have all planned!
Yeah, I'm really excited!
I'm not sure all my friends are here after I invited them to my private show
What time did you tell everyone to be here?
The invite said the doors close by 7pm so if they wanted to see the band, they would need to be here by now.
I can check out the front if you want me to.
No, it's okay. If they came, they came. We'll see.
Okay. Don't worry. It's a packed house.
The invitation to my private show says doors close by 7pm.
Are your friends coming?
Yes, they are.
What do they plan to see?
The band.
I'm sure they will like the band.
I'm frustrated with my friends right now.
Did something happen?
They missed the private show that I set up for them, after they said they wanted to see my band play.
Did they have some sort of conflict?
No, they just arrived at 7:30pm when the invitation clearly said that doors close at 7pm.
I'm sorry they didn't respect your time.
I threw a party for my friends when they graduated from college.
That sounds like a great time.
It was.  I hired a DJ and blasted music all night.  We rented a house on the hills for the weekend and invited everyone.
How many people showed up?
People wandered in and out all weekend long.  I wouldn't be surprised if over 500 people came by.
That's a lot of traffic.
I want to do something special for my guys this year
what are you thinking about doing?
I gave them a graduation party for working so hard and passing all their classes and getting a college degree
you sound like an amazing person
I'm just so proud of them you wouldn't believe it
I was glad I could give the guys a graduation party for passing their classes and getting a college degree.
They seemed to love it.
They deserve it. They worked hard.
I think you had a part in that. You were a good mentor.
Thank you. But they were all determined to get their college degrees regardless.
When they get good jobs, I hope they remember what you did for them.
I have been waiting so long for a fish
are you fishing right now?
Yeah but I am still waiting for a catch
how long ago did you throw a hook in the water?
it's been about an hour
maybe it's time to try a new spot
I spent so much time catching fish.
We can stay one more hour.
We been here an hour.
Let's keep staying around here.
I have to go to work.
Let's go then.
I went fishing with Dad yesterday.
How many fish did you guys get?
Only one, I waited over a hour to get my first bite, and finally snagged one.
How big was the fish?
I enjoy fishing.
Not me, I hate sitting there all day.
I threw a hook yesterday and waited for a catch for next hour.
I can’t stand being idle.
That is the fun part as you sit quietly by the water.
Can you just do something else while you wait?
Sasha was feeling like an outsider in the group when she first met my friends.
I noticed that was happening.
The more she settled in, however, the more things improved.
How did things improve?
My friends took to Sasha and soon she became one of the group members.
You really have such good friends.
The group really likes Sasha. She's one of us now.
I didn't realize you introduced her to your friends.
Yeah, she came out a few times and now she's just a part of the group.
That's nice because she is nice.
Yeah, she's a good friend.
I agree.
I wanted my friends to meet Sasha.
How did you meet her in the first place?
I met Sasha at school, and yesterday I invited her to join us for dinner.
That was a great idea!
Now she has become friend with my friends.
I knew that was a good idea.
I'm really excited about my new friend Sasha. She is a lot of fun.
Where did you meet?
We met at college at a party.
What have you been doing lately together?
Sasha's been hanging out with our group and despite she felt like an outsider at the beginning, now she's one of the group.
Sounds like a cool friend.
I was so sorry when I lost control of the car the other day.
I hope you are okay now. Did you fall asleep?
I did. I didn't think I was that tired, I felt so sorry.
Did you get the car out of the ditch and got back on the road?
Yeah, but I let the other passenger drive for a while.
I hope you took a nap while they were driving.
I cant believe I fell asleep at the wheel the other day.
If you were tired why even drive.
I didn't realize I was that tired.
That's crazy man, pay attention. You could have died.
I know, I was so sorry.
You must have been, yeah.
Since it was my first time at his coffee shop downtown, I asked Jordan what I should get.
I always get the mocha when I go to his coffee shop. It's a cross between coffee and chocolate and you can get it hot or cold.
I actually got the mocha.
Did you have it hot or cold?
It was super hot outside so I tried it cold.
Did you ask if Jordan was there so you could say hello?
I really want a good coffee this morning.
Have you ever had the coffee at the shop that Jordan runs?
No, is his coffee any good?
Yeah, it's great, it's right here.
Wow, that is close, thank you for suggesting this shop.
Oh, no problem.
Me and some of my pals from work met up at the park and played football today.
That sounds fun. How many games did you guys play?
I lost count. We were there the whole day.
Wow, you guys must have been really into the game.
We were. But now I think I've overdone it.
Yeah, you may be a little too old for all day football.
I'm glad my friends met up with me to play some games at the park
Feels just like me and you in the old times when we were younger and played in the backyard
I guess some things never change except we get older
Unfortunately I guess it has to be that way but at least we can have a good time
you're right I guess
I was scared of my own shadow.
I was scared of my own shadow, too.
I was really afraid of everything.
But I heard you say was.
I am no longer afraid of everything.
You must have grown out of it while I wasn't looking.
Okay so I just found a buyer for Casey's house.
Oh wow, that's great news! How much does she owe you?
She doesn't owe me anything, it's on me.
She can't not pay you though, Ash.
It is fine, really. This is just a friend helping out another friend.
Casey must have really appreciated it.
I put Casey’s house in the market last week.
I did not know it was up for sale.
I closed the deal yesterday but did not charge her anything.
That was nice of you.
We have been friends for a very long time.
You are a great person.
I just sold  Casey's house, but I don't won't to take money for that.
Why not, you used your time to help her
Call me crazy but I feel like friends don't take payments from friends.
That's pretty cool.
Ash didn't do so well at batting practice last week.
But he worked so hard for this. Does that mean he can't make the baseball team?
Not necessarily. His batting average and statistics are lower than required but I see some potential for him. He still has a chance.
Wonderful! So what will happen next?
On Tuesday, we will have another session of batting practice. If he does well I think I can give Ash a spot on the team.
Baseball has always been a sport I've been passionate about. He must have appreciated the opportunity too.
I think Ash can make the team if he practices his hitting
can you throw the ball to him so he can get a few swings in
Good idea, he needs to practice. 
try not to throw too hard so he can get warmed up
Good idea.
We are making the baseball team this week.
Oh nice to hear, how is it going?
I gave Ash another chance
More time to make the team?
Yeah, I just gave Ash another chance at making team by the end of the week.
cool.
I have a good feeling I'm finally gonna sell the car today.
I hope so. I know your dad is getting tired of seeing it in the driveway.
Yeah, and I need the money. It needs to happen soon.
Don't you have someone coming this afternoon to look at it?
I sure do. And I cleaned that car inside and out. It looks great.
Maybe today will be your lucky day. I'm crossing my fingers for you.
The car needed a thorough cleaning before I sell it.
I didn't know you were selling your car.   Your jeep?
Yes. I don't want to let it go, but I have to raise money to help my mom out.  She needs surgery and her insurance doesn't cover all of it.
You can always buy another one.
That's what I am thinking.  Mom is in a lot of pain.  I will sell anything to help her.
Why is she getting surgery?
I was at the park the other day.  I wanted some one to play with.
What are you, ten?
Oh, that sounded funny--I meant play tennis.
Any luck?
Yes, there was a girl hitting against the wall, so she agreed to play for awhile.
Well, glad to hear it worked out for you.
I wish we had one more person to play tag with.
Yeah, maybe that girl over there wants to play.
I'll go ask her.
Well, what'd she say?
She said she has a friend that's coming to the park in a couple minutes and then they'll come over.
Maybe you can ask someone else then!
I want to find someone to play with.
Do you want to ask the girl with the  kite?
Oh, that looks fun.
Ask her to play together.
Not sure it is possible with a kite to play together.
Using the handle there you can play together.
I asked a girl in the park if she wanted to play a game.
What game?
I wanted to play tennis and needed another player.
Did she accept?
I really hope I get this job. Cameron already gave me some advice, do you also have any tips?
Hmm...I have a few tips. Be yourself most importantly. And remember to make eye contact.
Great. Got it. Anything else?
Be prepared to answer any surprising questions because some people love to trick other people.
Cameron also said so. I think I’m ready for the interview now! Wish me luck!
You’ll do great. Good luck!
So what do you think of me working with you and Cameron?
That would be great! He should tell you some stuff though.
oh? like what?
You need to do exactly what the boss says and always double check orders
Yeah, Cameron also gave me that kind of advice, but that sounds quite easy to do.
you'd be surprised.
I have actually applied for a job where Cameron works.
Awesome, what makes you want to work there?
I think the atmosphere is great.
If you want a bit of advice, strive to be a team player and do what you're asked, they love that here.
Cameron also gave me the same advice, but thank you so much!
You're welcome, good luck!
Cameron told me to be honest during my interview since the job is where he works.
You didn't lie on the application, did you?
I didn't state why I was fired from my last job.
Kind of. You said your boss and you didn't click.
I was also late everyday! I hope they won't call my previous job.
You had too. You'll never get this job if they think you will be late everyday.
I think Austin got in trouble yesterday.
Why do you think that?
Because I heard his mother yelling at him.
What was she yelling at him for?
Because we weren't suppose to play in the mud but we did anyway.
I hope he isn't in too much trouble.
I think we should get out of the mud since it always makes Austin's mom mad
Last time I heard she was extremely angry when he got his shoes dirty since she just bought them
He should have tried washing them off with the hose 
Austin said he just turned the hose on lightly so his mother didn't hear it and he didn't get in trouble with her
Bu you have to try to be really quiet
Austin and I were not supposed to be playing with mud.  We were making a huge mess.  I heard Austin's mother yelling from the house.
She doesn't want you guys to get dirty.
We were already dirty.  It was too late.  It started raining.  I think she wanted us to come in from the rain.
It could be dangerous to play outside in the rain.  There could be lightning.
We were just having fun in the mud.  We didn't think about that but eventually we did go inside the house.
That's good.
I loved my performance today! I even threw big kisses up into the air after doing it!
I heard it was an amazing performance.
I practiced so hard to nail this routine for months and it paid off.
You sound like you could be in a real professional band.
Really? No one has ever told me that before.
Yeah, no joke you really do sound that good.
What did you think of the show?
That was a great performance
thank you
how long have you been playing guitar
it feels like my whole life
I heard you were throwing those kisses in the air after, that sounds so much fun
I am so happy after the performance, I was sending kisses up into the air at the end!
You had a great performance, congrats!
Thanks, I am loving it, I love my job at the theater.
I can tell, you look happy performing!
Yes, and I love to throw kisses to all my people that came to see me.
We all love it haha
I had an amazing night last night performing.
I heard that you did a great job on stage, I’m proud of you.
All the extra rehearsal time paid off for me.
When is your next performance going to be?
This Friday is going to be our next show.
I’m going to try to see if I can make it to that one.
I brought my Bible to the family last night.
How did your family take it?
They were happy, I read a few verses that bring me comfort.
Nice of you to try to bring them comfort.
I decided to bring my Bible out to pray with my family because we just lost one of our cousins.
That was a good idea because I think they need to find peace.
They are so upset by what happened and so am I.
You guys are strong you can get through this together.
I know eventually we will but it is just hard right now.
If there is anyone strong enough to bring your family together it is you.
I really need to come up with some ways to make some money.
What do you need it for?
I'm having trouble paying my bills.
Well, have you figured out how to make some money?
I figured I first try asking to borrow some from you.
That's too bad because I also need to figure out how to make some money.
I'm having trouble paying bills.
What should you do?
I'm not sure.
I think you should bag groceries.
yea that could be fun.
It pays alright.
Do you have any ideas how I could make some extra money to pay bills?
Do you have anything sitting around at home that you could sell? That's always my go to for some quick easy cash.
I do have an old gaming system I don't use anymore, I could probably get at least $100 out of it.
Sell that! And any other things you may have laying around, Facebook marketplace is super easy to sell on
I think I will! It might be good to declutter too.
Nice! Let me know if you need help figuring out the market place.
I need to figure out a way to come up with money to pay these bills.
Hm. Maybe you should get a job?
No! Instead, I heard that you can make big bucks by selling antiques from garage sales. Maybe that would work.
Let me be honest: Your life attitude is seriously messed up.
My wife was vomiting in the morning for the past couple of days.
I hope it's nothing serious.
It's actually a really good thing.
How is that a good thing?
She's been having morning sickness because she's pregnant. We've been trying to have a family.
That's is great news. I am so happy for you guys.
I slept late today,
What happened?
I had a horrible hangover from the night before.
You shouldn't drink that much.
Is it 12 pm already? I can't believe I slept so long. I have a horrible hangover.
That's ok. That party was wild last night and you drank so much .
Was it that much. I only did 4 shot, 3 beers and a coke. Oh and water.
That's all. Good thing you were spreading it out.
I literally just got into the office now.
Why are you so late?
I got so wasted last night and woke up late.
So I am guessing you are hungover now?
Yeah, I really need a coffee.
Don't worry, I will grab you one.
Oh, I have such a headache. I shouldn't have had so many drinks last night.
You did sleep until early afternoon.
But I didn't go to bed until after 4.
You're getting too old to do that.
Isn't that the truth. But I did have fun.
Yes, you did have lots of fun!
What did Robin want on her burger?
She wants non dairy cheese instead of regular cheese.
Okay, right.
She also wants a veggie burger instead of a burger.
Okay.
Oh wow, you actually got her order right for once.
Robin came in to eat the other day and it seemed like everything she ordered she wanted to substitute something.
Why couldn't she just eat what was offered?
I don't know. She is picky I guess. I think I went back with eight subs to the cook.
Did everything come out right?
Yep. It was just what she wanted and I even got a nice tip.
That's good! Can't beat a great tip!
I thought I got the best time but I was disqualified from the competition!
Wait, a challenge?.
Yeah, and I thought what's going on?
So you've been disqualified. Is it because you started before the bell?
No way! I started on time!
I'm sorry to hear that.
The chlorine in the pool water made my eyes so red and they still burn!
Why did you let the chlorine burn you so badly?
My friend dropped her ring in the pool and I had to swim down in the deep section to find it.  I kept my eyes open for as long as I could but finally it burned so much I had to search with my eyes closed.
That sucks!  So were you able to find your friend's ring?
Yeah, eventually I just kept feeling around and finally I hit the ring with my fingers and grabbed it.
Well, I'm sorry your eyes got burned like that but I'm happy you found that ring.  Rings are expensive.
I'm so excited to get a ring, but I don't know which one to get.
Why not just leave it up to chance? Try to pick one while having your eyes closed?
That's a great idea. Let's do it.
This should be fun. Wait, watch out!
Ouch! I bumped my knee into something.
Yeah you did, it was the glass casing for the jewels on display.
I'm so happy I found my ring!
I didn't know you lost it.
Yeah, it fell off my finger and rolled under the bed.
How did you find it?
I closed my eyes and just moved my hand back and forth under the bed. Then I felt something and it was my ring.
That's great! Next time be more careful.
Dude, where were you earlier, I was calling you for help?
I slept in because I had a rough night last night, why what happened?
I was out crossing the mountain road and I hit a wolf. It wrecked my car and I was in the middle of nowhere. Then the lightning storm came and I thought I was gonna die!
Sorry man, my phone was on vibrate, how did you get back?
It took me a while to find a signal in the storm, then I called Jan and she came to pick me up. I was out there for a whole hour and right before she arrived, I heard other wolves howling close by.
Wow! Next time don't go alone up there. Take off your clothes and put them by the fire, I'll get some dry clothes and help Jan with supper.
I was at a friend house, but nobody liked me there
Nobody?
I could tell, tough crowd.
Wow they were mean.
I hated them.
Well you should have left immediately man.
Thanks for having me over.
You're always welcome at my house.
The other people at school don't seem to like me.
It's hard for many people to get used to a new person, especially someone from a different culture.
I wish I had more friends.
I'll include you with my friends.  They'll like you once they get to know you.
So I run over there.
 I heard you friend I took a pic of you.
He did.
It's really a nice picture.
Yea a classic of the clock.
That is a great picture, your friend is good.
Okay so can you see where I stand in the picture?
You should have run over to the clock over there and then have the picture taken.
Okay, maybe I can run there now and we retake the picture.
Okay great, now just stand still.
Like this? How am I doing?
You are doing great, just put your hand on your hip.
I ran at the town square clock just so that my friend could take a picture of me.
Did you do it for social media?
Is that the reason I do everything?
That's the reason you get dressed in the morning.
And undressed.  I go through multiple outfit changes so that my pictures don't look the same.
Your life is just one photo shoot.
I had a fun afternoon today!
Really? What did you do?
I went shopping with a friend in the town square.
Fun! They've got good stores there.
Yeah, I ran towards the clock in the center of the square and she snapped a great pic of me!
I'd love to see it!
So, about that lasagna I invited you over to eat? We'd better do it another time.
Why what happened?
Well I'm embarrassed to say. But basically it was delicious.
Was delicious? You mean you ate it? All of it?
Yeah, sorry. I couldn't help myself. I was so famished after my run this morning.
Well I'll stop at the store and pick up ingredients to make another batch and we can make it together.
The lasagna was super fast to make
Do you have leftovers
No I ate it all
You must have been very hungry
Indeed I was
I made the most delicious lasagna yesterday and I ate it all in one sitting.
Wow, you must have been really hungry!
I was hungry, but I only made a small lasagna. I made enough for two servings for me, one for dinner and one for lunch today. I didn't mean to eat it all in one sitting.
Oh, that is not too bad. I thought you made a very large pan of lasagna.
No, not this time, since it is only me at home right now.
I'm glad you enjoyed it, it sounds delicious.
I've never felt this full before in my life.
What did you eat?
I made a whole pan of lasagna that I had planned to serve everybody for dinner.
What happened?
I got so hungry that I ate the whole thing myself.
I just finished my lecture, it totally worked on this one girl.
Oh, what do you mean?
This one younger girl was kind of iffy about it at the start. She was crying at the end!
That's sad but it shows how passionate you were.
Exactly my thoughts, I'm proud, honestly.
You should be, you did a great job.
So I had a great lecture today
wow, tell me about it?
It was a lecture I delivered to survivors
very interesting, I am sure you must have impacted many.
yea, I am very convinced I affected a young lady's attitude.
That is just awesome. Good job pal.
I think I finally reached someone today during my lecture.
That's promising. What happened?
A young girl came in with a snotty attitude and then changed it.
Was she a teenager or older?
A teenager and after the lecture, she came up to me with tears in her eyes and thanking me. I grabbed her and hugged her for a few minutes.
That's a wonderful story. I love it when we can actually touch someone with our words.
I missed a lot of work last week.
What happened to you?
It wasn't me, it was the weather.
Oh yes, it did rain a lot last week.
In construction you just cannot work while it is raining so today we ended very late to make up for lost time.
Get some rest my friend.
I'm so sorry I'm late, I almost didn't make it all!
What's going on, what kept you?
We had to finish a job today that we couldn't work on all week because of the rain.
Well that must suck during rainy season
It really does, we always have a little leeway on time but not much, we have to get it done when we can
Well I'm glad you're here now, let's grab a beer!
We had to work today until very late since we didn't work last week.
Why didn't you work last week?
It was raining and we are working outside so we can't work when it rains.
Oh, I see.
Yep, just making up for lost time last week.
I guess the rest of the week will be busy.
Since it rained so much last week and we couldn't work we are having to make it all up this week
Man that sucks, does that mean late nights?
Yah super late. The wife is not happy
Haha I bet. But at least it's good money
I know. I just wish my job didn't depend on the weather so much
Yah I totally understand that
I might sound like a horrible person, but I could care less I took everything when Remy and I got divorced.
What do you mean? Did you leave him something?
No. I took the house, all the furniture, and cleared out the bank accounts.
Is that legal?
Well, it's what the courts decided, so yes.
Wow. I'm kind of surprised about that one.
Remy was a mistake from the beginning but I didn't know he'd be such a terrible husband.
Well you're divorced now and you look well off.
I didn't leave him with anything in the settlement.
You got everything?
Yes, even the house. And he deserved it too. He cheated and was cruel.
Well then I suppose in some way, justice was served. You're better off without him.
I'm so sorry guys we got booed off stage.
It's your horrible jokes.
they are bad what should I do?
Work on them!
What else.
Watch the movie Funny People.
My dear friend today was bad.
How? What happened?
We were booed off of the stage
Why?
I told terrible jokes at the first show comedy.
Oh you should have worked on your jokes before going on stage.
I took a look at Kai's feet. Guess what I saw?
You saw some fungus.
 He needs to see a fungi doctor.
A boring doctor will do too.
I felt like a rewrite of the speechwas needed after everything that was told to me.
Your friends tried to give you some good feedback.
Everyone gave me really good feedback that I used
Send me a copy when you are done with it
I was already planning on doing that
I look forward to reading the rewrite.
On my way to school this morning, I found an injured dog.
Near your school?
No, on the roadway and the injure was petty bad.
Oh that sad! what did you do to it?
I returned it to the family it belong to.
That was nice of you.
I am so glad that I got to reunite this dog with his family.
It's a good thing you stopped when you saw the dog hurt by the side of the road.
I can't believe how many cars just drove past him.
Hiss family must have appreciated you saving him like that.
They actually wanted to give me a reward for helping.
If I know you, you wouldn't take anything for doing the right thing!
I found a limping dog as I was driving home today.
Oh no! What happened?
I have no idea. Maybe he tried to race a car to get across the road and didn't win.
Poor guy, what did you do?
I put him in the backseat and took him to the address on his collar.
I bet they were really grateful you brought him back.
I just got back from bringing that injured dog back home.
How did you find out where the dog lived?
He had a tag with is address on it.
I'm glad he didn't die. The dog looked really injured when you first found him.
Yeah, I figured he got hit by a car. But nothing was broken, so I didn't even need to take him to the vet before returning him home.
Sorry I've been busy decorating for the party all day.
It's okay, did you use the dark or light blue streamers?
I used the light blue streamers, I think they look nicer.
I can't wait to see it.
Thanks, do you think everyone will enjoy themselves?
Of course they will, you're a great host!
I want to throw a party tomorrow.
Great, that is good news.
I decorated the house for everyone to enjoy.
Need help?
I can use a hand in the kitchen.
You know I'll be there.
Austin bought me a lottery ticket.  He said it's a chance to win a million bucks so I accepted it.
Casey always buys lottery tickets.  He bought me one for my birthday.
Did you win anything?
No, the odds were not in my favor.
I don't think they are in mine either but I can always hope I win big.
Don't lose hope.  That's the reason why a lot of people play the lottery.
I want to win the lottery.
I heard Austin offered you a chance to win a million dollars in the lottery?
How do you know? And what do I need to do next?
Just fill this up and enter this number.
Okay I will take the chance.
Good choice, Casey.
I got a million thanks to Austin!
Congratulations man! Glad you go the chance.
Me too! It's been amazing to win this, I can't believe we won the lottery.
Would you share with your friends now?
haha you are funny man!
I'm serious!
Austin just spent some money on a lottery ticket for me.
Why would he do that? It's such a waste of money?
I know, but he is willing to risk a little money to win a lot.
Whatever. You both are just throwing money down the drain.
Riley's been so overwhelmed so she let me give her a hand with the kids this morning.
That was very thoughtful of you! I know she definitely needs the help.
Yeah, the boys are so cute, but they never seem to calm down. They can run you ragged.
Well, it's not easy being a single parent with three boys under 10 years old.
I was exhausted by the time I dropped 'em off -- and all I did was drive them to school!
They're a handful, to say the least. I honestly don't know how she does it.
The police say the person found dead in my house broke in.
How did Lee react to finding a dead body?
I was the only one that saw the body, I made him wait outside.
Who do they think that he was?
Just a homeless guy off the street.
Myself and my son Lee found a dead body in our house.
You can't be serious, what do you mean?
I mean the house was broken into and this guy died of a heart attack according to the paramedics.
Of all the crazy stuff to happen to you, some guy dying in your house has to be number one.
I need you to watch Lee for me if you can because he is a bit shaken up by this.
Of course, you can bring him by anytime.
Did you hear what happened to me yesterday? I had to call the cops!
What happened?
Nothing had been moved and nothing was missing, but there was a body in the house. I made Lee leave the house and wait outside!
Oh gosh, poor Lee.
And you know what, it was my old boyfriend from college that I dumped for you.
But that was 25 years ago. I am sure he got over it by now.
I can't believe I made it. I had to run like crazy to get away from those thugs.
Oh no. That's horrible. What are you going to do next time?
I don't know. I might need to get a knife.
Those are dangerous. If you try to fight them you might get hurt.
It's ok. I will just use it as a threat. Then run. Maybe they will leave me alone.
I just got a new game and I can't wait to play it.
You always get the new games.
I know, I have turned into a hardcore gamer.
It is great because I always get to try them out.
OK it is installed and ready to go.
Let's see how it looks on your monitor.
I love video games.
I didn't know that.
I always have all the latest video games ready.
That is fun and cool!
Do you play?
I don't know how to play. Maybe one day, you can teach me.
I always love to play videogames
Yeah we can tell.  You have a closet full of the latest video games
Right.  I am glad that other people think they are fun to play as well
It is important that you know
Yeah.  Thanks for being here to play with me
Of course.  It really is fun
What's your favorite hobby?
I like to go fishing. You?
I like to play video games. I have all the latest video games.
Wow. Sounds fun. Can we play together?
Of course.
Thank you.
Last night I told my friend that I got that job I was telling her about!
Was she happy it is the higher paying one?
Yes, she just wasn't happy I will have to move out of state.
Oh, I didn't realize that, I'm not happy about that either.
Neither did I, but for that pay I am willing to give it a try.
You will be missed for sure but I wish you the best of luck!
I am calling friends to let them know that I am moving out of state.
What happened? Why?
I got a new job.
It must pay well for you to move.
It pays really good. I have informed other friends last night.
We are going to miss you.
If Jesse follows my lead I'll teach her how to box
What are you teaching her first?
To take your hands and bring them up like this...
with one above the other?
yes, keep the left hand slightly above the right hand about chest high
alright, that feels easy enough
I am going to teach Jesse to bring her hands up
Is that going to help her not get hit when boxing?
When you are boxing, you want to protect your head and body
Is this the right way to hold them?
Yeah, it allows you to block a punch
I got such a bad sunburn yesterday.
Did you wear sunscreen?
I did, but then I was out longer than I expected.
I hope it's feeling a little better soon.
I put some aloe on it, so that will help.
That's a good idea.
My skin hurts a lot.
It's really red, that looks like a nasty sun burn.
It is, it was worse but thanks to aloe it's getting better.
You should put sunscreen on.
Trust I won't forget to put some on next time.
You always say that but end up forgetting about it.
I guess I had it pretty easy as a kid.
Yeah. The rest of us were happy to get anything for birthday and you got the newest and greatest gifts out there.
I guess my parents could spend the money since I didn't have brothers and sisters.
I wouldn't trade my sisters and brother for anything.
And I would give anything to have a brother or a sister.
I guess we never really know what is important until we grow up.
I was in the class when the teacher asked a question.
Did you know the answer?
Yes, I did.
Did youi let the teacher know?
Yes, I did raise my arm.
That's good.
I had to raise my arm in class for that question because I had just studied the answer the night before.
You were so enthusiastic about it that you almost jumped out of your seat!
I know, but I just wanted to show the teacher that I am participating in class.
I think you definitely proved that point.
I wasn't too much of a show-off about knowing the answer, was I?
Some of the class was laughing at you, but I think they were just surprised by your ambition.
I told Aubrey we really need to score more baskets.
I know she has been missing a lot of shots and it could be because she is a bit sick.
I understand but we can definitely use Aubrey on offense.
She'll go back in and try her best, you'll see.
If she keeps shooting the ball, they will eventually drop.
I am sure Aubrey will play better in the second half.
I think if Aubrey practices for about an hour each day she will get better at pool
I don't think she wants to practice that hard because she hates this sport
She wouldn't hate pool if she was good at it like me
not everyone can play pool for five hours a day since they have to work
guess I'm just lucky then
I think I may have pushed Aubrey too hard.
During the game?
Yeah, she couldn't get the ball in the entire time.
I think she just needs more coaching.
I agree, but I think I hurt her confidence.
You should apologize.
I feel really good about myself right now.
Glad to hear that. Has anything excited happened recently?
I was just playing Go Fish with my father.
That is a very fun card game. How did it go.
I won every game. I'm really proud of myself.
Go Fish takes a lot of skill. You must really be good at it!
I finally beat my dad at a game not involving a ball.
Was it chess or some board game?
No, it was a game of go fish.
Your dad is really competitive over things like that.
Yeah, but with me, he truly feels like it's win-win.
Yeah, he can now claim to have the best go fish playing son in his peer group.
I cant believe I beat my dad at go fish three games in a row
you're learning so quick that you're getting too good at the game
maybe I might let him win one the next time
I wouldn't get too cocky .
So, I had my orientation for my new job today!
Oh, nice! How did it go?
It went a lot better than expected. I had a lot of fun!
Great! I know you were not sure if you'd like the job.
After the fun day at orientation, I've decided I will like this job a whole lot.
Cool. You know what they say, if you like your job, you'll never work a day in your life!
At first, I didn't know if I would like the job, but after orientation, I know I will.
That sounds awesome. What do you like the best?
My orientation went super well because I really liked the other co-workers.
Yup. It makes a huge difference if you work with good people.
It really does, plus I know my new job makes a difference so I'm gonna love it!
That is so cool. I'm so glad it all worked out!
I was really unsure about this job until today.
What happened to change your mind?
They had orientation which was nice and fast and then wound up being a social event and was fun.
So you think your co-workers are nice people?
I think they are and the job seems like it's going to be a good one for me.
I'm glad because you were worried about it.
I always call a spade a spade.
Why is that?
Because, I'm a honest person who cant lie.
Honesty is the best policy.
Yup.
I call it like it is, if people don't like it than that's fine with me.
Is that always a good idea? You might hurt peoples feelings that way.
I don't really care if other peoples feelings are hurt, I am honest and not afraid to call a spade a spade.
I just think honesty isn't always the best policy Lee or at least don't say everything that pops in your head.
I can say what I want. I'm sorry that you don't like that.
Alright Lee I just hope you try to watch your words.
I should check out this suit!
Nice man, I think it'd really look sick with these shoes.
Ah hell yeah let me try those on!
Try these shoes too.
For sure, I can never have too many shoes.
Hey, the employee is starting to look irritated, maybe we should bounce.
Can you get me a size 6 shoes to go with this dress than give me the blue jacket. Thanks!
Quince, you can only have 5 items in the fitting room.
No, its 5 of each item. What about a pair of white boots or maybe some Vans?
You should try the green skirt with these Crocs or you want the platform shoes?
Do they have high heel Crocs and a green scarf?
No but the employee is starting to look irritated, maybe we should hurry up.
I love trying on the outfits at this shop!
Hey Quinn, I think you are getting on the shop assistant's nerves with your selections.
But there are so many different shoes here to try!
You should probably put them back after you try them on.
Oh yeah, I will do that once I'm finished with all these awesome shoes.
Okay, I'll help you since you've made a mess.
I got angry and asked Kai if he stole my candy at the fair.
And he said he only took one piece.
Why did he take it without telling me?
I don't know but you should not hit people for that.
I didn't hit him. I just pushed him. I hope he doesn't do it again.
Please don't do that again either.
I let my anger get the best of my when I ran into Kai.
Wait what do you mean?
Well I saw him there like he was going to meet up with our group.
Really? After what happened last week?
I know. I ended up freaking out and pushing him to the ground.
I bet that caused quite a scene.
I pushed Kai down at the fight.
Yea I know fun game at the county fair.
Hope all is well with that fun, but I was also angry.
Yea that's crazy glad we stopped.
The worst is coming later this afternoon.
I'm ready to see that.
I was going to take this waitress job but Skylar said there was a landscaping one that he liked more.  He thought I should apply for it.
Did you get the job?
Yes I got the landscaping job.  I'll start next week.
That's great.  Does it pay more?
Yes it does and it's more creative which I like.
You are a creative person.
I really think I could have made more money by being a waitress but the landscaping job is nice, I like being outside in the sun
You wouldn't like being inside all day anyways since you love the outdoors
yea, well I guess Skylar was right
I'm just glad you listened to Skylar's advice in the end
He gave you really good advice
I am going to write back to Remy
I think that is a good idea.  That was such a nice letter she sent to you the other day
Of course it was.  I think that she is a great person
Better get on that letter soon
Right, right.  Thanks for the reminder
No problem
I saw the note Remy wrote for me.
He's now waiting for you to write it back.
Yeah, but I had nothing to write with.
Tell him before it's too late.
Okay, Thanks.
You are welcome.
How did I go to class without something to write with?
Good question, however, that just means you didn't have to write down any work!
True, but Remy wrote me a note, and I wanted to write back but I didn't have anything to write with!
Oh no, why didn't you ask someone in class?
The two seats that were near me, were empty today!
Well just talk to Remy after class so she doesn't think you ignored her.
I'm sorry I didn't write Remy back. I don't have a pen or anything.
Why would you come to school without anything to write with? How are you doing your work?
I've been borrowing from my teachers. I didn't feel it was right to borrow a writing utensil and use it to write you a letter.
That makes sense I guess. You really need to be more responsible.
Who are you, my mother? Are you going to ground me?
I might if you don't write Remy a letter soon!
I was telling a story about a land before time to all the kids earlier today.
How did it go?
Well, the kids seemed to like it. But that wasn't the funniest thing.
What was the funniest thing?
All the adults in the room were all interested as well and listened in.
I might have to hear this story.
We had a few friends over and we were just sitting around talking. Then the kids wanted me to read them their nightly story.
Did you read to them?
Yes, I took the kids to bed and read them a story about a land before time.
You're a good mom - your kids always come first.
I was just about done and looked up and saw all the adults in the doorway listening to my story.
That's funny. You must have been telling a good story.
I just told a story for the kids in the room.
What story did you tell them?
I told them stories about land before time.
It Should be interesting for them.
I believe so. Even the parents were listening so intently.
I can imagine the adults listening.
Those kids loved my story. The adults did too, they were tuned in as well.
What was the story about?
A land before time, in another dimension of space.
That sounds kind of unusual. Where did you come up with that?
I made it up myself, took me a week listening to it. Apparently everyone loved it.
Apparently so, if the adults listened in as well!
Is the road in front of your house a one-way street.
Yes, it is.  Why do you ask?
After I parked, I noticed that the traffic was only flowing one way down the street.
Have you moved your car yet?  You could get a ticket if you don't.
I just moved it to the big parking lot nearby.
That's good.  Your car will be safe in that parking lot.
Jeez, man. Look at all this traffic!
I know. It hasn't been this bad in months.
Must be that ABBA reunion concert or something. We should take another road instead.
How about we turn left here? We can cut across the city and avoid all that stupid traffic on the highway.
Good call. Gonna turn there. Good eye!
Heh, well my friends call me the navigator for a reason!
I moved the car to the left lane after a while.
Why did you switch?
The traffic seemed to all be on one side of the highway.
Did not many people move into the open lane ahead of you?
No, it seemed that everyone needed to get off at the exit for some reason.
I think it might have been a football game.
I turned Kendall in to the police when I realized she was the one who broke into my store.
Wasn't she your friend at one point?
Yes, but she started running with a bad crowd and I stopped talking to her.
That is good, look at what her new friend group got her.
It got her jail time, hopefully. She isn't a good person.
Maybe time in the slammer will help her re-evaluate her life.
I have already contacted my friends but no one wants to come to the party with me
What party?
The house party later, you were not invited? Do you want to come?
Absolutely I been looking for a party all night.
I'll come get you in a hour.
Great see you then.
Hey, I have a question.
What's up, Sydney?  Is something wrong, boss?
Nah.  I'm just curious.  I'm supposed to carry out Alex's plan.  But I'm the leader.  So if I'm the leader, why am I not carrying out my own plan?  Why am I sworn to be loyal to Alex?
Well, I can't rightly say, boss.  Are you saying you don't wanna carry out Alex's plan?
No, I guess for now we'll do it Alex's way, whoever Alex is.  But never forget, I'm the leader.  Okay?  I'M THE LEADER.
Ok, boss, no problem.  You're the leader.  Now let's carry out Alex's plan.
Being the leader, I had to carry out Alex’s plan
That was very responsible of you
I’ve always been loyal to him.
You are a great leader and a true friend.
I always want to be on top of things.
You surely do.
A patient came in to the office today for a tooth extraction and it was a very interesting procedure.
Really?  What was so interesting about it?
Well, when I examined the tooth, it appeared to be a fang, like a snake or a vampire.
Really?  It was pointy?  And long and sharp?
Yeah, it was really long and pointy and sharp like a fresh needle.  I would show it to you but the patient wanted me to save it for him as a souvenir.
Dang!  I would really love to see a tooth like that.  I believe in vampires.
The dentist gave me the tooth to give to the patient after their appointment.
What did you put the tooth in?
We have tiny keepsake boxes for patients to keep their teeth in.
Is there a charge for the box.
No. It is a gift from the office.
I wish I had my teeth for keepsakes.
I'm saving the patient's tooth.
Is it a souvenir?
Yes the patient asked for it as a keepsake.
Good for him.
Yea I think it is a bit unusual but I was happy to do it.
Yes you did that is so fun.
Jesse traced my clothed back.  He didn't ask for permission.
How did you feel about that?
He made me feel uncomfortable so I told him to quit it.
Did he?
Yeah,   I told him he doesn't have permission to do that.
Good for you that you are drawing your boundaries.
I hate driving after snow storms.
I know because so many people are crazy on the roads.
How can they be crazy on the rules when they know there’s black ice out there.
People are inconsiderate and always in a hurry to get to where they need to be.
I just pulled over to the side and let the idiots crash.
If I was on the road, I would do the same thing.
I think it might too dangerous to drive in these conditions
It is a good idea you pulled over because I see some of these cars sliding around on the road
I would hate to wreck my new car and my dad would be pissed
Yea, he wouldn't like you wrecking your new car and I am sure he cares about you too
This is too dangerous to drive on right now.
Yeah, I heard there is black ice everywhere,
It's true.
You did the best thing pulling over and waiting.
I was late getting home because I had to stop to play. I had to lie to cover for being late
What did you play?
I played on the playground and just hung out with some old friends
that sounds relaxing.  I am glad you had a great time
Thanks I really did.  It was nice
I bet it really was
Hey.
You came in late yesterday.
Yeah, I stopped to play a game but I couldn't tell my husband about it so I had to bent the truth about it.
If he eventually founds out?
He can't.
Okay then.
I told my husband I was late getting home because I had a flat tire.
But he knew that was a lie.
Yea he did.
Did you talk about this then?
I don't think talking about it is really needed.
I think it is.
I can't believe I am saying this but I think I need to go into rehab.
I agree, but can you even go right now since you stole that money from work?
I am working with my attorney, my family won't even talk to me anymore.
If you want people to trust you Cameron, you have to quit lying and stealing.
I know the past few weeks have been really bad, I can't stop using and that means I can't stop lying or stealing.
I care about you and I just want you to be the Cameron who has been my friend since kindergarten.
Do you think I'm sketchy?
Honestly, I do.
What makes you say that?
You took the office money from your last job.
I needed that money.
It's why people can't trust you.
Everybody is against me. I feel so down all the time.
Just because you feel down doesn't mean everybody is against you.
Well they all know that I took that money and now feel like they cannot trust me.
You have to work hard to rebuild your character.
Yeah. I really screwed up and now I have to fix it.
Right. Stop feeling sorry for yourself. You can fix the situation.
I am having a bad today.
Why is your day so bad?
I ran out of gas, I was late to work, my roof is leaking and the toilet is running.
Wow, that's a lot of problems in one day.
I took care of everything though.
You were always good at facing things head on.
I'm so proud of myself today.
Did the going get tough?
Yeah, there were so many problems I had to solve.
And you solved them?
Every single one.
As they say, the tough get going.
people were waiting  for me outside when I arrived at my fathers house
oh why was that, were you late for something?
I decided to host the village meeting, so they were waiting for me
so you were late for your own meeting
yeah, I should have planned it better
I made an offer to host the village meeting.
Where did it take place?
I offered to hold the meeting at my father's house.
How did it go?
Everyone was early and waiting for me when I arrived.
It sounds as if the meeting got off to a good start.
I finally sold the old house.
I thought your family wanted to remodel and keep living there.
That's what they wanted, but I wasn't going to listen.
So you had to put your foot down and make things go your way?
That's what it takes sometimes.
As long as you're happy with the result that's what counts.
I told the other I want to keep the old house until we can find a preferable buyer.
Why do you like that old dung-pile so much?
That house has sentimental value. When we sell it I want to know it went to someone nice.
That's a lot of work and concern for just some old house.
Yeah, but we do this my way or no way at all.
I see Riley. It's your granddad's house after all.
I feel bad for being so forceful with my old neighbors
I guess you really wanted to sell this house
it's just that my dad gave it to me and I really don't want anyone else to have it
that is understandable but you didn't have to be so rude
I hope my friends liked what I cooked for dinner last night, it was a new recipe.
Are you kidding when has someone not liked what you cook?
I guess so, I just get nervous whenever I make something new.
It always smells delicious in your house and I can imagine even if haven't tried the food you made last night.
Well I hope they enjoyed the dinner.
After hearing this I am so hungry right now.
I have developed a new pizza recipe.
Sounds good.
I think all of our friends would like it.  I'm inviting everyone over for dinner.
I'll help you host.
Great, let's make a guest list and a shopping list.
O.K., then we'll text everyone and hit the store.
I am making a bunch of sandwiches for a party.
That does not sound like a lot of fun.
It is not, especially when you have to make plain ones.
You mean without condiments?
Yep, just bread and findings.
That does not sound appetizing, just very dry.
Are you still coming to the Nine Inch Nails concert with me this weekend?
Of course! I am so excited! Thank you for buying my ticket!
You are welcome. The tickets were super expensive!
I know and I really appreciate it! I wouldn't have been able to afford it on my own.
No sweat. That's what friends are for.
I'll definitely make it up to you! I promise!
I can't wait to attend the upcoming concert.
Have you purchased the tickets?
Of course I have. They cost me an arm and a leg.
I bet you are going to have a blast at the concert .
Me too. It better be worth the loads of money I paid.
Who will be playing?
I'm really excited.
About what?
I'm really excited for the concert coming up and I've already paid a lot of money for the tickets.
Wow, can I come with you.
Let's see if tickets are still available.
Okay pal.
Now where did I drop that knife?
Did you look in your car?
Yes, I already checked there. You know I think I dropped it back in the woods.
Oh. All the way back there. Do you want me to come with you to search?
Hey I was right. The knife was here underneath this rock where we stopped to drink.
Glad you found it. You've had that thing for years.
I did something good today for my community.
That's great to hear. What was the event?
I was visiting a homeless shelter today and provided some food. I also gave a small amount of money.
They must have really appreciated the generosity.
They did, but more importantly I think sometimes it's good to do things for others and not just yourself.
So true. I try to live by that rule myself.
I felt so bad for some homeless people outside the grocery store.
That is sad they don't have a home.
I knew they were hungry so I gave them some of my groceries.
That is really sweet of you.
I also felt that I should give them some money too.
Wow, that is inspiring to hear about how much you care.
I feel so bad for homeless people ever since I was homeless too
I know how you feel because I feel bad for them too
you think they would want me to get them a job?
you can always ask them and see what they say I guess
I guess I will see tomorrow
I found a way to increase the profits
you're so smart with your company
Yeah I increased production and efficiency
does it hurt your hours?
no, it doesn't when it is done efficiently
you must be such a good employee
The production was raised by adding the light into the mixture.
How were you able to blend the light in?
We took out the oil and added the light. It increased the efficiency by 23 percent.
I am impressed. I have recommended that the boss give you a raise.
I think I've found a solution to my company's problems.
What problems does your company have?
The company needs to increase profits and efficiency, I found a way to increase production.
You must have been under a lot of stress.
The pressure was insane, it's like I need to save the company.
I hope you're well paid for this.
I have been under so much pressure at work and I think I finally came up with a solution.
What are you planning to do?
I came up with a way to get things done more efficiently and it should also increase profits.
That sounds really good. I bet your boss is thrilled.
I think so when I showed her how we will increase the production she wondered why she hadn't thought of it.
Hopefully you get a raise or some recognition if it works out!
I found a way to increase production at work today.
That's cool. I'm sure your boss was very grateful.
All the managers were grateful. They have been putting everyone under pressure saying we need to increase profits.
So I'm sure that your new plan will do just that then.
Yes it will be a moderate increase in profit.
Will you see any of that profit in your pay check?
I sprained my ankle this afternoon while I was hiking.
Really? So that's why you've been limping.
Yeah, I was out there and I completely didn't see a large branch that was on the trail.
That sucks. I've always hated that trail because it's always a mess.
Yeah, I usually pay a lot more attention. I'm just going to take it easy and relax on the sofa.
I can order us some food if you want to just hang out and watch a movie.
It took me three hours to get down the last hill today. I'm exhausted?
Three hours? What were you doing...walking on your hands?
I wish I could have. I tripped over a stupid log on the way down and twisted my ankle.
Why didn't you call me? I'd have come up to help.
Actually, I tried but I didn't have service there. I finally got service when I reached my car.
Aubrey and I had a date.
That is sweet.
I held on to Aubrey once we got down the car.
Did you guys have fun?
It was a wonderful evening.
I am glad you had a good time.
Hey coach, I am not feeling well today. Can I go lay down on the mattresses a bit.
Sure, You can go lay down on that mattresses right over there.
Thank you, I will bet better after this
No worries just make sure that you are better
Taylor really loves to read to me and the kids every night
I am sure he loves it, what is his favorite book to read
he really loves the cat in the hat by dr suess
that's my child's favorite book too
I guess we have something in common then
When I told Carson the production numbers, he was pleased.
Really?  He never seems happy.
We doubled our goal in a few hours.
That's great.  Will you get a raise?
Hopefully I will.
You should demand a raise.
My friends didn't want to watch my movie.
What did you do?
I gave them all 3 choices of movies that I would love to watch.
Smart girl.
You know me.
So, Sasha really is a good kid, you did a great job raising her
why thank you and thank you for bringing me out to lunch
oh don't mention it, I figured I need to get to know the people important to her
you seem like a good person yourself
thanks, I try to be, did you say you grew up in Kansas
I sure did, we had our own farm
I really like Sasha and I wanted to make a good impression with her so I took her mom to lunch.
She's really close to her mom so that makes sense.
Yes and I know that Sasha has to take care of her mom so I wanted to give her a break.
That's very nice. How did it go?
I think it went well, Sasha was pretty happy.
It sounds like you made the impression you wanted.
I want to make a good impression with Sasha.
What are your ideas to do that?
I think I'm going to take her mom to lunch.
Go somewhere nice!
She likes sushi.
That's a great idea!
I'm going to convert to a different religion.
You don't like your current religion?
No, it's the one my family chose, I'm my own person.
I hope you find the religion that's right for you.
I went to my mother's house.
Was she there?
I stood on the step, put my finger on the doorbell and hesitated.
Did you ring the bell?
I thought about ringing the bell and decided not to do it.
That might have been for the best because your mother is so critical of you.
I was standing on their doorstep with my finger on the doorbell and I could not decide if I should ring it or not.
So, did you ring the bell or run away?
I just decided to run away when they opened the door to leave.
Oh my goodness - what did you do?
I couldn't do anything for a minute and then I laughed and said something stupid like good timing.
Ha ha - good save!
Maybe Remy has a point after all.
He sure does, and he has been trying to convince you all night.
It's just that I didn't feel that Remy knew what he was talking about.
Well, now you've got to consider his words.
Maybe you are right, I will consider what Remy said.
That's the right attitude!
I just gradated high school and am now attending college.
That's great! What are you studying?
I decided to study philosophy.
Why philosophy?
I just value ethics highly
I didn't know you were into ethics so much.
So I had a meeting with the counselors at the college today.
Nice. What happened at the meeting?
I had to pick a major, and ultimately went with Philosophy.
Good choice! What prompted your picking Philosophy?
Well, I like the concept of morality and ethics. The idea of good and evil and the many shades of grey in between. Ethics in general fascinate and matter to me.
They matter to me too. Maybe I'll pick that major too!
I graduated high school and was accepted to college.
That is commendable.
I selected a major.
What course of study have you chosen?
I decided to study philosophy, because I valued ethics highly.
I wish you the best.
I'm so glad that you asked me to the prom
You're the first person I thought of asking
What time would you want me to meet you before the prom?
Just pick me up an hour before prom so we wont be late
Shouldn't you be the one to pick me up since you have a car?
I've been worried about not having a prom date.
But you do now, right?
Yes, Kai asked me to go.
That's awesome. Do you like Kai?
I guess so, they've had a crush on me.
Aw! So sweet.
Had a lot of fun last weekend.
What did you do?
I hired Addison to help sell cookies. She put my ideas into action.
Sounds fun. Did you sell a lot of cookies?
Yes we did!
Good to hear.
Thank you again for helping me to sell these cookies
Of course! I think you had a really great plan to sell at two locations across the city
Yeah, I figure we can always sell more if we both are at high traffic areas
Yeah, and it was a good idea to sell at different times of the day so we make sure to see as many people as possible
Well I couldn't have done it without you! You've been such a big help
I'm glad I could help! Plus I think we've sold a lot more cookies thanks to your ideas
Thanks for hiring me to help sell cookies.
Oh, I am so glad that I hired you. I mean, I seriously need all of the help I can get.
I hope I can be of use.
Totally. I'd like to start brainstorming now.
Okay, I will make a  list of my ideas.
Great, I will then put those into action.
It was such a good decision to hire Addison to help me sell cookies.
I take it that you guys sold a lot of cookies.
Yeah, we did. He's a good salesman.
What makes him so good?
He was able to take my ideas and put them into action, like being active on social media.
You should give him a raise.
After so many years, Sydney is finally behind bars.
I saw on the news that you arrested him.
It wasn't an easy case to solve but I'm glad he's locked up.
We all are. The town's been waiting a long time for this.
Another cold case solved.
Congratulations. You did us all a great service.
I decided to go crazy.
You really were crazy last week.
That's because I had several tests at school and work prior.
You are too crazy.
I know. I just want to enjoy life.
Go live up to your imagination.
I went a little crazy with my diet
Did you eat a lot of sugar again?
Yeah, I had several tests at school and a lot of shifts at work prior
You need to rest, that's a lot to do!
I treated myself and went overboard
It's okay sometimes it's a good reward to have
I'm thinking of asking for a bike for Christmas.
A bike? Where would you ride it? The roads are so busy in this town and they don't have any bike lanes, it's a bummer.
I live pretty far out in the country, and there are lots of trails there. I always see people on them, they look like they're having a fun time.
Oh, really? Maybe I should get a bike too and go riding with you.
Definitely! Have you ridden on bike trails before? They can be pretty rugged.
That sounds like a great challenge, count me in!
I'm going to ask my parents for a bike for Christmas, these trails look perfect for riding on.
That'd be great, then we could ride together.
Any suggestions for a type of bike?
Definitely a mountain bike of some sort, either a Schwinn or Diamondback. Those are the best brands.
Cool, thanks for the recommendation.
There's never anything to do around here. I want a dirt bike.
What are you gonna do with a dirt bike Cameron?
I'm gonna explore every back road in the county.
That sounds awesome I think I want a dirt bike too.
If we ask our parents to get us one I'm sure they'll agree.
Yeah, I'll also ask my parents for a dirt bike.
I feel sorry for these kids because they don't have any parents
You're such a nice guy for taking care of them
I sometimes feel like a father figure to them
They're lucky to have someone like you working here at the orphanage
One day all of them will have loving parents and will leave poor old me behind. It is every orphan's dream to meet wonderful rich parents.
Maybe not all of them will leave. Some of them might want to stay with you and ride the ponies.
No, all of them must go one day.
Maybe they won't want parents because they will have to do chores and homework.
They won't be any different than what they have to do here.
I am sure some of them will want to stay and let the others dream of having parents.
You'll never guess who my father is dating?
I don't know...tell me.
My best friend, Casey. She's my age.
Really? Your dad is dating your friend?
Yes, it is upsetting. I can't be around either one of them.
You're never going to believe this, but Casey is dating my father.
What?  Isn't she your best friend?
Yeah, she is, and this is not something I'm having an easy time with.
Wow.  How long has this been going on?
They'd been seeing each other for a couple of months before they told me.  I was shocked.  I didn't even know what to say.
Well, I'm here any time you want to talk about it.  I'm sure it has to be hard getting used to.
I am very shocked today
Do you want to tell me what happened?
It is huge news I have to process
I am sorry you are having a hard time with it.
Turns out Casey told me she is dating my dad.
That is huge news, indeed! Take all the time you need to process it.
I am so glad I took off from work today.
What do you plan to do?
I really took the day off to have some quality time with my kids.
That is great! It has been a while since you last did this.
I know, so the kids are enjoying this tremendously.
Awesome! Have lots of fun yourself, too.
It was a great day at home with the kids.
That quality time is important. They will look back on it with gratitude.
We've all been so busy#, it just seemed like we hadn't been together in a while.
Did you take them out to lunch?
They wanted McDonalds and I was happy to take them.
That sounds like a great day.
I took today off from work at the last minute.
Oh, what do you have planned?
Just going to spend the day with the kids. I think we'll finally start building that tree house I've been promising them.
Oh that sounds like fun! I used to have a tree house.
I know. We used to sneak girls up there, remember?
Maybe you should think twice about building one for your kids.
I am taking a day off work to spend time with the family.
That's great you should keep a healthy work/personal life balance.
I agree, plus the kids are on vacation now so we get to spend the day together.
Sounds like a solid plan.
They are going to be so happy to spend some time with dad.
I bet they will, hope you have a nice day off with them.
I haven't spent quality time with my kids for a while now.
What has been happening with you?
Work! I've been busy at work. I want to spend quality time at home with them.
How do you plan to do that?
I've taken the day off work
Good!
I am surprised with the results of my last long-distance run!
I know! You are so good, you might even break the record!
That's what my coaches said. They say I might even break everyone's record in this school.
Isn't that amazing? I am so proud of you!
Thank you. I still can't believe I'm doing this good.
Your parents must be so proud of you.
I'm a great runner.
Did you run in college?
Yes, it was very fun.
What was your time.
I ran in the fifteens.
That is very fast.
Taylor asked me for help on her math homework. I was able to help her.
I always knew you were good at math.
I just pay attention in class.
That's why you're so good at it.
I'm impressed with all my pupils, but Taylor has really managed to stand out.
Taylor, really? I thought he was one of your problem cases.
He was, but something happened and he's managed to start turning himself around.
That's so nice to hear. Good for him.
Yeah, he's reaching out and asking questions now whenever he doesn't know something.
That makes all the difference, doesn't it? Knowing when to ask for help, I mean.
I asked Aubrey about her pet cat.  She didn't want to tell me at first but then I kept asking her because I love cats.  She named her Cleo.
Cleo like Cleopatra?
I think so.  I assume that much.
That's a good name for a cat.
I don't know if I would name my cat Cleo. Cleo sounds like a crazy old lady to me.
It is a bit dated.
Turns out Aubrey has a cat.
Does she? I didn't know you liked cats.
I love cats! And hers is so beautiful and fluffy.
What is her cat's name?
Her name is furball.
Well, that's appropriate since she is so fluffy!
Riley has a cat. It's a really cool cat.
What's so cool about Riley's cat?
It acts like a human. If you call its name, it'll answer, and it stares in your eyes as you speak to it.
So it's like having a real conversation then?
Yes. I asked Riley what is the name of this cat? and where can I get one like it?
Sounds like that's a pretty rare cat. You would be disappointed by most others.
We were driving in a rush this morning.
You must've been late.
I was running out of gas but missed the exit.
That happens at the best time.
I can't believe I missed it.
I'm glad you got to the destinations safely.
I had a really bad day today.
Oh no, what happened?
Well, it's kind of my fault, but I was driving too fast on the highway which made me miss the exit to the nearest gas station, and I ran out of gas.
Oh wow, that sucks. Did you have to walk to the gas station?
Unfortunately yes, and it was so hot out I almost passed out.
Sorry to hear that. Next time don't drive so fast!
I finally found a new job!
Oh! That's awesome, cause your old job was about to end, huh
Yeah, I was getting nervous about being out of work
So perfect timing then
YES! I'm so relieved
I'm glad you found it!
I feel terrible, I have stomach pain.
Did you eat something spoiled?
I think I did, I ate a fish burger that didn't smell right.
That must  be it then, where did you get it.
I bought it from a street vendor.
No wonder you are sick then.
The fish burger from the street vendor didn't smell right but I ate it anyways.  I felt so sick that night.  I threw up three times.
Are you feeling better now?
I am better but still not quite myself.  I think I am dehydrated.
You need to replenish the electrolytes in your body.
My body lost a lot of liquid.  I think I have a couple bottles of electrolytes in the fridge.
Drink that.
I wish I had passed on that fish burger from the  street vendor.
Did you not like it?
I think it upset my stomach. From the way it smelled, I think it may have gone bad.
I hope it is not food poisoning. You should see a doctor.
I need to bail on going to the movies tonight.
But you already bought tickets, why can't you go?
I am not feeling good, I ate a fish burger from a street vendor for lunch today.
Uh oh, that sounds like food poisoning coming on.
Yeah, I was concerned it didn't smell right but I ate it anyway and now I feel sick and shaky and am starting to sweat.
You should go to the bathroom. Later you can try to find someone to give the tickets to.
Lee was cheating on me.
Yes he was.
I knew that he was.
He was with someone else.
Yes, that's horrible.
He did a bad thing to you.
I got a new dog and I am struggling already.
Why, what's wrong?
The dog is playful, but would not listen.
Just call him loud.
I have to be calling the dog often because it doesn't stay.
Give it a bit of time, and the dog will learn.
I'm trying to do some training and commands with our new dog.
How is it going so far?
She is just so playful, it's hard to get her to listen!
Yes, I'm sure she will learn over time though.
Yesterday I must have called out to her ten times before she came back into the house.
Well, you have to remember that she's still just a pup.
My new dog is such a funny little puppy
I love him, I saw him yesterday
He is a bundle of energy but he doesn't listen
Do his ears perk up?
Nope, I have to call his name
He will learn within time
My new dog is really starting to annoy me.
Why? New dogs are always a struggle.
He just doesn't listen to anything, so I am constantly calling his name.
Sounds like a child to me, but also a dog.
Ha, that is funny, but yes, like a child.
We all know children and dogs don't listen.
I had been thinking for months about going to France for the summer.
That sounds great!
I know, I literally have spent every day practicing my French.
Are you near fluent?
Not near fluent, but I am mediocre right now.
It's great that you want to learn the language before travelling abroad.
I am so glad that I was able to redeem myself after that belly flop at the swimming pool last weekend.
Really how?
I showed everyone what a good diver I really am.  I jumped in from the deep end and did a perfect dive.
Well you ain't got to tell me what a good diver you are.  I already know.
Thanks friend.
No problem.
I went to the pool today
Did you land on your stomach again?
Nope, I did the double back flip!
Woah, I am glad you redeemed yourself
Told you I was going to do better than that belly flop
You're right, that was way cool
Can you guys help me with this scientific case?
What's the matter, Bailey?
I'm trying to prove this hypotheses for biology class but I'm having trouble.
Did you follow the scientific method?
Yes, but all my evidence contradicts my initial expectations. I expected a positive answer but all my answers show the readings were false.
Then you have to present false as your conclusion. In science evidence is everything.
I was sure it was true.  I was absolutely sure they killed them!
Why did you think that?  Why would they kill them?
Well, everyone knows they were messing around with their wife...
Yeah, but when they died they were on tour in Europe and them and their wife were split up and they were already involved with that Russian supermodel.
Yeah but they were killed with their gun!
Yeah but the robber confessed that they found the gun in a drawer while they were robbing the place!
I believe that what they said was true.
I know, I can't believe it either, Bailey.
All the evidence shows that it was false, though!
You're right, Bailey, once they went through everything, they realized it was false.
I can't believe it. I thought it was true!
We were all really fooled with this one, Bailey. Don't feel bad!
I am telling you it's true.
The evidence shows it's false though.
I an telling you an UFO landed in the field.
They can't find any proof though.
I saw it and thousands saw it.
The authorities said it was just a weather balloon that came down.
I think it's true, the pandemic is a hoax.
Then how do you explain the thousands of people who are dying from CO-VID?
It could be fake news.
So many people got CO-VID and died.
I'm so sorry to hear that, I guess the evidence shows my belief is false.
The virus is definitely real and we all need to do our part to help stop the spread.
I'm just looking at some flight schedules.
Are you planning on going on a trip?
Yeah. I've been wanting to go on a trip for a while.
Where are you planning on going?
Mexico. I've never been there.
I hope you will have a great time.
I want to go on vacation!
Where do you want to go?
I really want to go to Mexico, I have never been there.
You should go then!
Okay, let's start looking at flights and see how expensive they are.
I hope you find a good deal!
I think I found the perfect flight and hotel package. I need to call them to see if it works for them.
Where are you guys going?
To Mexico! I haven't been there for 10 years. I can't wait.
It must be beautiful there.
Yes, it's like paradise in some places.
I went to the park with some guys in my building.
That sounds fun. What did you guys do?
We played a couple of games of basketball. It was really fun.
Which park did you guys end up going to?
The one up the block.
I am glad you had a good time.
We had such a great time playing basketball today 
I am glad it was fun, did any of them dunk on you?
There is no way I would ever let them dunk on me, man.
Well next time you go to the park they will have to try.
Do you remember when I shot that three in their face and swished it?
Yeah don't remind me about that one.
I was out at the park all afternoon today.
It was perfect weather. What did you do?
I went with some friends; we played ball then had a barbeque.
Oh, that's cool. I didn't know you could barbeque there.
You can grill at designated spots. It was so fun.
I'm glad you were out all day.
I had a great time at the park.
I am glad you enjoyed it.
My favorite moment was when we played at the water splash area.
Yeah, that sounds like so much fun. I can't wait for you to go back.
Let's plan to go to the park this weekend. We can play in the splash area again.
I'll plan for it.
I invited Sasha and her friends to my party yesterday. Big mistake.
I already know what you're going to say. They're inconsiderate.
Putting it mildly, yes. They're rude and have no manners. And they made a complete mess!
Now you know for next time to tell Sasha NOT to bring her friends.
Obviously. They nearly ruined the whole party!
Sasha really needs to reassess her friendship with them.
I will never invite Sasha's friends over again.
Why, what happened?
They made such a mess. I was up all night cleaning up their mess.
Did you make Sasha help you clean?
No, but I told her I pray she doesn't make that kind of mess at their homes.
I'm sure she doesn't. She has good home training.
Today I will ride a bicycle, would you like to go with me?
It would be great, but why are you wearing the helmet before? If you are not on the bike yet
It's a habit that I have had since I was little
That's a good habit to have, better to be safe than sorry!
My dad always recited those words when I complained.
Sounds like he was a smart man!
I went for a bike ride today.
That sounds nice.
Yeah it was and obviously I couldn't forget to wear my helmet.
Yes of course! Safety first!
Indeed, it is certainly a necessity.
Well I am glad to hear you are being responsible.
I am worried about my friend Bill.
Oh, no! Want to talk about it?
He told me he lost his job and his worried about not being able to pay his bills on time
That is really bad news.
On top of that, his wife asked for a divorce and he's late on the car payment. I told him to ask for a loan for now. 
I think that is good advice, hopefully he will be better soon. 
I went to the bakery.
What did you buy on the bakery, Austin?
I bought some cookies and gave some, to my friend.
The cookies I told you about?
Yes, those ones. And my friend seems to like them.
I am glad that your friend likes them.
I went to the bakery today to get a cookie. It was the size of my head.
That's a pretty big cookie.
That is a humongous cookie. I ended up sharing it with a friend.
That's good. It was probably a lot of sugar.
It was way too much for one person.
I bet your friend enjoyed that it was.
I went to the bakery to get some treats.
What treats did you get?
I heard their cookies were really good, we could share between us and even take some home
That sounds like a delicious plan!
I just travelled to my grandma's by train.
How long was the trip?
The trip actually was twelve hours so I had to keep busy.
What did you do to occupy all that time?
I decided to watch all sorts of Learn French in twenty-five minutes videos.
Now you can travel to France for the next trip!
I finally got to Nice.
How was the train ride?
It was so long! I kept myself occupied watching Learn French in 25 Minutes videos on my phone.
And did you learn French in 25 minutes?
Oui, Monsieur!
Wow, you're like a real Parisian now!
I watched that French movie.
It's hard to watch.
You have to use your phone for this.
Yeah, it's like two hours long.
That's too long for me.
Yeah, hang in there.
It took nine hours to get there on the train.
Did you sleep the whole time?
I took a short nap, but mostly watched videos to learn how to speak French.
That's cool, learning languages is a great skill to have
French is such a beautiful language, I really like learning it.
Say something to me in French.
I think I can find a good car online at this website my brother gave me
what kind of car are you looking for?
Probably something cheap with good mileage and a decent paint job
I think you can get something for under a thousand if you look hard enough
Sounds great to me
I needed to buy a new car so I looked online for something that was within my budget.
Are you looking for a cheap car?
I want something nice so I would be willing to spend more.  Something mid price range would be good.
Do you have anything particular in mind?
I went to a BMW dealership and test drove a few cars.  There's one that I love.
Great choice.  BMWs are good cars.
I love this time of year.
The leaves always look beautiful turning colors.
Yes, and the best part is that it's not hot but not cold enough to need a coat.
So true. Hopefully the weather doesn't start acting up.
Luckily, the weather has remained warm.
I know. Let's enjoy it for as long as possible
When I was in Brazil, I never wore a sweater.
Weren't you worried about catching a cold?
The weather their is warm all year round.
It must be nice to live there.
I hate wearing coats because it is always too hot here in Florida.
I know what you mean, but in Minnesota it can get chilly in the summer sometimes.
I like certain types of coats though but I can never wear them unless it gets unusually cold which never happens.
Yeah, I feel like it would only get cold at night and never during the day.
When it rains sometimes it will be in the 60's but that's about it.
Get yourself a nice coat and go for a trip to Minnesota in the winter then.
I just never have the need to wear a coat.
Why do say that?
Because the weather is always warm.
Yeah, but there's a few days where it gets a little cold
I love the cold. I'm thinking of getting rid of my coats.
You should just give them to charity.
I just got the money for her tickets.
Which tickets?
The school dance tickets remember?
Oh yes, it will be so fun.
I got money from my mom for the school dance the other day.
Did you buy the tickets already?
No I'm going to get them after school today.
Who are you taking to the dance?
I was going to ask them if they would like to go?
I didn't see that coming. I think they would love to.
I finally got all the money I need from the kids to pay for the dance tickets.
That is good, when will you buy them?
Tomorrow morning during the first break of the day I will buy them at school.
How many will you be able to buy?
I have enough money to buy tickets for 10 students.
Be careful carrying around that much money all day to be honest.
I had a nice hike at the country park.
Did you climb the mound?
Yes, I got to the top after parking nearby.
Did you know people broke into cars in that park?
Yeah, that's why I parked nearby.
You could certainly see everything from the top of the mound if something did happen.
I went to the local country park today
That sounds great. Did you drive there?
Yes, I did. I parked on the shade and went for a hike.
Did you have your hiking gear with you?
I always have my gear and water ready in the car. I made it to the top of the park!
Wow! Good job!
I just came back from a really cool hike
That's really fun! Where did you go?
I went to the local country park
How far into the park did you hike?
I actually went all the way to the top.
Wow! That's really impressive! I bet it was very fun.
Guess what?
You are going scuba diving?
Funny, no I'm going to the country park. Once I park the car then going to hike to the top of it.
Oh that sounds like fun.
My friend Sasha gave me her bracelets to sell over the weekend.
Where did you sell them?
At the art fair at school.
Did a lot of people buy them?
Yeah, they did. I sold them cheap but still made a lot of money for both of us.
You are such a business man.
I can't believe how much money I'm raking in with these things.
So Sasha wasn't lying when she said her products were in demand.
Nope. They just about sell themselves. Especially at the price point she's got them at.
That's cool. You guys make such a good team.
Yeah, I want to keep this going. I'm having fun.
I'm sure she is, too. After all, you're making money!
I can't believe how much money I made from selling Sasha's stuff.
I'm so happy you found such enthusiastic buyers that pay well for the products.
Well, she had some good stuff in there, a lot of vintage video games and toys.
What brought in the most money?
She had a copy of the Super Nintendo Game Earthbound with it's box and instruction manual. That rakes in a lot with certain collectors.
And to think, this stuff was just sitting in her basement. I am sure she is thankful you helped.
I did really well selling Sasha's products.
What products does Sasha have?
She makes affordable jewellery. She was having issues selling them. I made a deal with her.
That's great, you were able to help her out and make money while doing it.
We made lots of money. I'm taking a trip to Hawaii next month.
Lucky you! Hawaii is so beautiful!
I should start shopping more often.
Why? How often do you go?
I only go once a month and it takes forever.
Maybe it would help if you went every 2 weeks.
Yeah, it took like an hour to just load them up last time.
You should definitely go more often.
Hey, you know I only shop once in a month right?
Yes, I do. Why are you bringing that up?
The last time I went shopping it took me an hour to put the groceries in my car.
Wow, really? Maybe you should consider going shopping more often.
People always complain about how long I take to shop, but that's because I only go once a month.
Why do you do it like that?
I live far away from the grocery store and want to save gas by only going once a month, and then buying in bulk to last me in between trips.
I'm surprised you could fit all of those groceries in your car in one trip!
Somehow, I manage.
Is the tooth fairy going to come tonight?
Only if you put your tooth under your pillow!
Ok.  I just did that.  How long do I have to wait?
You are just supposed to fall asleep as usually.  It only comes when you are sleeping and will disappear if you wake up on it!
So I'll have my gift in the morning?
Yes.  Look under your pillow when you wake up.
I just lost my first tooth.
Did it hurt when it came out?
No, I even put it under my pillow.
Why did you put it under your pillow?
So the tooth fairy takes it and gives me money.
You're going to be rich!
I got five dollars last night.
Really? How come?
The tooth fairy gave them to me.
How lucky! Usually the tooth fairy gives one dollar.
The tooth fairy must love me very much.
It is because you're very good, Riley.
We lost our first tooth. We were told to put it under our pillow.
Why do you put it under your pillow?
The tooth fairy comes at night and gets it from under the pillow and leaves a money treat.
What did the tooth fairly leave you for your first tooth.
We got five dollars for the tooth.
Wow. That's amazing news!
Me and Phil are both on diets, and we passed a McDonalds.
Oh man, that's dangerous. Did you stop by?.
Well, no we didn't, but then we couldn't get the idea of burgers out of our minds.
Oh, so what did you do?
We went to McDonalds in the next town over. Those burgers were all we could think about.
I hear ya. Sometimes that craving is hard to resist for sure!
We were so hungry last night.
Why? Didn't you have dinner?
We have no money with us. Would you believe we found free food at the end of the street?
It was perfect timing then.
We were so glad. We left full and happy.
You should always have money in your pocket in case of emergency.
Did you see the deal that they are running at the new steakhouse?
No, I didn't even know there was a new steakhouse in town.
I should go. They have a $15 steak meal with drinks that has great sides.
Oh, man. That sounds delicious. Will you go over the weekend?
Yeah, I plan on going Saturday before the dinner rush.
OK, can't wait to hear all about it.
Carson found out I had been bad-mouthing him behind his back.
Uh oh.  What happened, did he confront you?
Yes, he did.  He really gave me a piece of my mind.
Well, if you were talking about him behind his back, do you think you deserved it?
Yeah, I guess I did.  I should have said what I said to his face.
Hopefully this won't have a lasting impact on your relationship with him.
Carson was full of spit and vinegar and told me off.
What brought that on?
I do not know but as soon as he left I went to see our boss.
What happened with your boss?
I talked badly about Carson behind his back.
I hope nothing bad comes from this.
Well I got yelled at today.
Who yelled at you?
Carson yelled at me because they heard I was talking about them behind their back.
Were you?
I didn't say anything that I haven't told them to their faces so, that's a no.
Well, hopefully everything blows over.
It was an unmitigated disaster!
Are you talking about the dinner you had last night with your boyfriend's parents?
Yes.  It played out like one of those horrible movie scripts!
Like Meet the Parents?
No, more like, Dinner for Schmucks!
Oh, my.  Were you one of the Schmucks?
I finally met my boyfriend's parents.
About time, after dating for years.
I was really nervous.
How did it go?
They were actually really nice; I wish I hadn't waited so long.
Well, I suppose your boyfriend was not ready for that.
His parents are so funny
How so?
They just had this really bright attitude and kept telling me things about him
Oh, like stories of the stuff he did as a kid?
YES!
So psyched. I finally got to meet my boyfriend's parents!
Awesome! How long have you been together now?
Well, it's been several years, so it's about time! I met them at their house.
Sounds like you guys got along well?
Yeah. I think I made a good impression, and I liked them a lot.
So glad he finally let you meet his family. That's a big step!
My boyfriend and I have been dating for a while.
Have you met his parents?
Yes I finally did recently.
How did it go?
He took me to his home to meet them. They were nice.
I'm glad they like you.
I gave my mom some money last night.
Why did you give her your money?
She has been working hard and providing for us the best she can since he died.
I know that it was hard on all of you when that happened.
Turning 15 and being able to go to work and feel like I am helping.
You are a big help to your mother and sisters.
I'm so glad that I can contribute to my family.
That's so awesome that you're helping out with money from your job.
My mom works so hard that I have to do my part.
Your mom is pretty awesome and a hard-working lady.
Yes she is, so helping her out is a blessing to me.
You're a great kid Alex.
I'm so happy I got this new job.
Yeah, I bet.
Yeah, it feels good to be able to help the family.
It sure does, and I bet it feels even better to be able to give your mother money.
Yeah, my mother is a good lady. She deserves the best.
Well said.
I gave some of the money I earned at my job the past two weeks to my mom.
That was really nice of you man, I'm sure they appreciate the help.
Well with my dad being laid off we really need the extra money.
I know you are in a tough spot but you have to do what you can to help.
It is just hard sometimes because I want to do things with my own money but I know they need it.
Good things will always come to those who wait, always believe that.
I was running on the hike and it was very bumpy.
Was the hike leader going fast?
Yes, and I tried to catch up but I slipped and cut my knee.
Oh, I am sorry to hear that! Does it hurt?
It hurts a good bit but I put some Neosporin on it and it will be better.
You should let the hike leader know to slow down in the future for everyone else's pace.
I was pretty careless yesterday.
Can you tell me what happened?
I was not paying attention to the various surroundings.
That spells trouble.
I slipped, I fell and I cut my knee.
Your head is too often in the clouds, my friend.
I went on my first date with that new girl, I just took her to the movies.
Why didn't you guys do something special?
I wanted to keep it simple. I'm not even sure if I really like her.
I thought you were really into her?
I thought so too. But she's kind of vain.
You're too laid-back of a guy for a vain girl. Not into the high maintenance type.
I believe in simplicity.
Same here.
For example, I wanted to keep my first date simple so we went to the movies.
You can't go wrong with a movie.
I wanted to keep this date simple, so I hope she doesn't mind going to watch this movie.
I hope she likes movies.
Me too. I'm glad we're both going to enjoy this.
I am sure you're happy to be spending time together.
I think our relationship is off to a great start.
I am glad to hear that.
I wanted this car with built in seats that were too expensive for me.  I am applying for a credit card so I can pay for it.
I didn't know you were in the market for a new car.
My last was totalled in the car crash.  I had coverage on it so I got some money back to put towards a new car.
Are you okay?  I didn't know you were in an accident.
We haven't talked in a while now and a lot has happened.
I hope you're okay..
I hate to get a credit card but it is the only way that I can afford these seats
I'm sure it will be alright as long as you try to pay it off as soon as you can
I would just hate to go in debt and fall behind
As long as you are careful there will be no problem
Thank you, you're such a good friend to me
I got some new seats built into my car.
Did you like the end product?
I loved it, but it was too expensive for me. I had to get a credit card.
Those must be really nice seats
I wanted the seats to be built in.
That would be perfect then.
I did not realize it was so expensive but I went with it anyway.
Where did you get the money?
I had to use my credit card.
It should be worth it anyway.
Did you hear about Susan's finish?
Susan must be an amazing athlete.
She has been training for this race for months.
She is really fast, isn't she.
That is probably the easiest hundred dollars I have ever made!
I just knew Susan would come first in that competition.
Was that yesterday?
Yes. I cashed in on it when my bet on her came through.
I bet you made good money.
It's a decent $50 from a $20 bet.
Congratulations on your winnings, and well done to Susan!
I knew Susan would win, that is why I bet so much money on her!
You bet on her to win? I guess she should be flattered.
Susan is clearly the best runner out of everyone.
I am glad she finally won a race.
Tonight she was so fast! She won and that is all that matters.
Surely she is happy you were cheering for her!
I knew the whole time who would win.
Who did you think was going to?
I knew Susan would, she is super fast.
Sounds like an easy bet.
It was a piece of cake to guess and I won.
Good for you!
I had a car accident on the way to work.
Oh no! Was anybody hurt? Are you okay?
No, I'm fine, the other driver was fine. I already notified my insurance company.
What were the circumstances? Was it your fault?
Unfortunately, yes. I was fiddling with the radio and rear-ended the car in front of me.
That's a common first accident. Try paying more attention behind the wheel.
I just rear ended another person so I need to report the accident with my insurance
Oh, no! Are you ok? Any injuries
No, I am fine, but the cars aren't
Ok, did you file a police report?
No, we just took care of it ourselves.
I hope you took the other driver's information for the insurance.
I wasn't paying attention today and i rear ended another driver
Was everyone okay?
He said he had a neck injury but I wasn't even going that fast to injure him
I bet he is just trying to get some easy money off of a scam
Probably, because I was only going about ten miles an hour
I'm really impressed with Cameron's plan for the next few quarters.
So you're going with Cameron's plan then?
Yes, it seems to be more profitable and sustainable for the company.
That's great for you and Cameron. I hope it works out.
Same here. If it doesn't, I'm gonna look like a fool.
I've thought about Cameron's idea and I'd like to try it out.
That's excellent!
Yes, I think it seems very profitable and we'd like to start with it as soon as possible.
That's exciting!  Do you need him to work out anything else?
Yes, we'd like to make a presentation for the meeting next Monday.
I am sure he will do that.
I had to establish a new business plan at work today.
Were there any good ideas?
A few. Cameron had the best concept of diversifying our interests and products. Risk-averse but also with a mediocre reward. But better than going bankrupt!
I agree. Better to play it safe in these tough times.
The rest of the board agreed and voted on it. Cameron's gonna get a promotion for his great ideas!
Good for him! Glad you guys are moving forward.
I was gone for so long.
Yeah, wasn't it a month?
Yes, for job training.
I bet Tabby and Rover were happy to see you
Yes, I wondered if they would even remember me, but they did, they were so happy.
I bet they were really glad when you got back.
Where's Tabby and Rover?
They're in the basement with Jill.
I thought they'd miss me, let me call them, I'M HOME!
They must be running to you now.
Ok, slow down Rover, now I know you missed me. Oh, and there's Tabby
I don't know why you were so worried!
I had to evict one of my tenants the other day for non-payment.
How do you go about doing that?
I had to file the paperwork with the city and send an official eviction notice.
What did the tenant say? I bet they were upset.
They were upset and yelling at me, but you gotta pay your bills you know?
Of course. What a tough position for everyone to be in!
My tenants haven't been paying.
Ugh that's tough.
It is.  I researched a few ideas but decided I needed to evict them.
You have?  Do you think you need a lawyer?
No, for now I just served the eviction notice.  I'm going to give them time to clear out.
Makes sense.  Let me know if you need next steps.
I hate to do this, but the tenant has not been paying their rent. I must give them an eviction notice.
That's sad. Are there no other options?
I am sorry, but I cannot afford to have a tenant who does not pay.
I understand. That's unfortunate.
I am sorry that I had to do this.
I finally got this convict to the trial he deserves
Is the case getting a lot of attention?
It was packed with journalists, and it was months of legal preparation, so we are ready.
Is a big murder case, I guess people are curious to know what happened.
We will se, we are finally on trial
Yeah, good luck.
I'm so excited for this trial to begin.
You have a tough case on your hands but I think you'll still do a great job.
I've been having plenty of sleepless nights with this case.
Do you think that you actually have a shot of winning?
Right now I'm just worried about getting one jury member to be on our side.
That's all it takes in the court room.
Well the hard part is over, the case is underway now. Did I tell you?
No! That's exciting. Do you think it well go in your favor?
Well it's pretty high profile, there were lots of media and journalists in attendance.
I'm not surprised. It is a pretty notorious case.
If it goes well, I'll be set for life. If not, well I'll still be well known.
That's very true but I'm sure you will bring truth to light.
I'm bringing the convict to trial.
It is a notorious murder case, very exciting!
I know, right? The courtroom will be packed with journalists.
You'll be a hero.
I hope it will go well.
Try your best!
I got a call at midnight because Riley was stuck on the side of the road.
What was wrong with Riley's car?
Riley had a flat tire and didn't know how to change the tire.
You know how to change a tire?
Of course, I do. My father taught me.
Last week Riley bought a new car, did you know that?
I did, but I was told she wrecked it.
Nah, she just hit a curb and blew out her tire. She was stuck so she called me.
Did you help her out when she called?
Yeah, I drove over and changed her tire and put on the spare. It only took about ten minutes.
That's cool.  Everyone needs a friend to call if they need help like that.
I had to help Riley change her tire.
What happened to her tire?
She must have ran over a nail or something.
That sounds awful. Was it hard to change it?
Not really, and helping my friends is important to me.
I am sure she appreciates the help.
Riley just called me.
What's wrong?
He car is stuck on the side of the road wit a flat tire.
That sucks.
Riley called me in a jam last night.
Oh yeah, what was going on?
He blew out a tire and was stranded on the side of the highway.
That's scary. Were you able to fix the tire?
I changed it, and got him on the road, but he's going to need to get a new tire.
Poor guy! I hope he will be okay.
My  Friend asked me to feed his pet!
Were you able to feed the pet?
No! I knew before I came to work but it escaped my mind.
How will the dog eat?
I also asked a friend to feed it.
That is better!
I almost forgot to feed my friend's pet before I went to work.
You're taking care of your friend's pet?
Yeah. He went out of town and asked if I could feed it until he returns.
What kind of pet is it?
A lizard.
Lizards are scary!
I need to feed my friend's pet tomorrow!
Will you do it before going to work?
Yes, and the cat is stubborn so it will only eat wet food.
Many cats are picky eaters.
They are, and the best time to feed them is bright and early in the morning , so I will go and fill up her bowl so she has enough food for the whole day.
You're a good friend
I hope she has some free time.
Why? What's up?
I know she is great in math, and I am having some trouble maybe she could help with.
I hope she will help you.
Mr. Sam's classes are difficult and I just don't get a lot of this stuff.
Maybe he is not a very good teacher, but you will figure it out!
I am going to call Aubrey's girlfriend.
What's up?
I am confused at this math homework. I don't know if we have to do numbers 10-20, or numbers 20-30?
I hope she has the answer!
We will see!
I called Aubrey's girlfriend for help with the math homework.
You guys are in the same math class?
Yes.
Was it awkward to talk to her?
No, she was really nice. I'm just happy for Aubrey.
Okay.
I thought I understood it, but when I tried to do the math homework, I was lost.
Math can be confusing.
I didn't know what to do. Finally it occurred to me: I could call Aubrey's girlfriend.
Good thinking. Is she still good at math?
Yes, she is a math tutor, and she was able to answer my question and make it all make sense for me.
That was a smart idea, to give her a call. Sounds like it really saved the day.
I don't understand the new math.
Math can be a confusing subject
I was confused by the math homework tonight so I called Aubrey's girlfriend.
She must be very good at math.
I asked Aubrey's girlfriend a question and she chewed off my ear.
I guess you're still confused about the homework.
I went to the zoo with my family today.
Did you see anything you liked a lot?
Yes, we got tickets to the orca show.
And those were your favorite animals?
They were so big and did tricks.
The orcas are very intelligent.
The zoo was amazing today, we saw orcas as well.
Who did you go with?
I went with my mom, dad, and sister and also my girlfriend.
You all must really love animals.
We do, and none of us are scared of the snake section.
Probably many people wouldn't be going anywhere near the snake part!
You're not going to believe what happened to my pants.
What happened? Are you okay?
They just split right open!
Oh no! Hope not many people saw you.
My friends helped shield me.
They are good friends. Hopefully it won't happen again in the future.
I had to water Sasha's plants.
How come?
She went away for a bit and didn't want her plants to dry up.
You are a good friend, I am sure she is very grateful.
She is! She wanted to give me some money, but I couldn't accept it. She invited me to a coffee instead.
Surely she is glad to have such a reliable friend to count on.
So I set the two of them up on a blind date.
Are there any blind dates anymore? I mean with the internet everybody knows what everybody looks like?
I don't know if you can trust the internet. Now there are deep fakes.
So nobody knows what anybody looks like anymore.
There's this boy in my class who would really hit it off with my friend so I set her up on a date.
Did you tell her that?
Not yet.  She is a bit shy.  She's going to be mad at me.
You are just trying to help a friend out.
That's true. I think this boy is good for her.  She's had some bad relationships.
Hope things work out between them.
I just set my friend up on a blind date.
You're a great matchmaker! Who was it?
There's this boy who I know will get along smashingly with my friend, so I arranged a dinner date for the two of them.
I hope their date goes well!
Hey, do you think my friend would be willing to go on a date with my other friend?
You mean like a blind date?
Oh, it'll be fun. I think they will hit it off. I trust them.
You should tell them. They will be excited.
I am excited for them to meet.
I hope they will like each other.
Shoot! I got to remember to set my alarm to four.
In the afternoon?
No, morning, my new job starts real early.
Oh, yeah! Are you ready for it?
It was very sudden but I think I will be okay.
I hope you have a great first day!
I am so excited about my new job. Gotta get an early start!
But Lee, it's a second shift job. Why are you getting up at 6am?
I rather play it safe. I ironed my clothes, got new shoes, took a shower and had my haircut.
Wow, you want to really make a great impression on your first day!
I am jumping right in. Ready to take on the world.
So when is your forklift training at Amazon?
I keep trying but I can't win the game. I am quitting.
Oh no. You got to keep at it. Don't give up.
I am so upset. I hate losing.
Maybe you should try something new then.
Playing this game in the computer is very challenging.
What are you playing?
I am playing chess with a robot I think.
That definitely is a hard battle. They are programmed to win.
I guess you're right. A better just quit this.
Yes, or you can play with another human being instead. Not sure is an even game.
I'm so bummed out right now.
What's wrong?
I really tried to be good at basketball but I just couldn't get the hang of it. I quit the community team today.
Nonsense! It just takes a lot of practice. How about you ask your coach to give you some pointers?
Alright. I will give that a shot.
By the time he's done with you, you'll be Michael Jordan.
I quit playing Fortnite.
Why? It is so much fun?
I could never win no matter how hard I was trying and it started getting aggravating.
It can be pretty hard at times.
I felt like a failure since I keep losing and everyone has at least one win.
You should try it again, maybe you will get lucky.
I got my friend a little something.
That's nice. What's the occasion?
It is their birthday, I got them a ring.
Must be a beautiful ring! You're a good friend.
I saw them looking at one that looked like it.
I met with my friend after the show. I hadn't seen them in a while.
That is very nice. I hope they are doing well.
I got them a gift that they liked.
Aww you are so sweet.  What was it ?
A new mug.
I am sure they were very thankful.
I met my friend after their show!
Lovely! Surely they were thankful you attended their show.
I brought along a little gift for them too.
Really? What was it?
A necklace I thought they would like.
That is a beautiful gesture.
I was so engrossed watching the game.
You must have been quiet.
I was sorry my team lost.
I am sorry to hear that.
We will do better next time.
Good luck to your team.
I can't speak right now
You are focused on the game.
Damn, we lost.
Good try.
I am so sad because we lost that game.
I am sorry to hear that. Weren't you cheering for your team today?
I was trying to concentrate so much, I forgot to boost their morale.
It's okay, I'm sure they'll get them next time. Your team always comes back.
I guess you are right, I'll cheer for the next time.
That is a very good idea. Maybe you can practice for the next game.
Sigh. They may come back.
But its a blowout. They're down by 30 points
Have some faith bro! Be a true fan.
Well, they are not doing very well today..
I believe in miracles.
Okay, five minutes left down 30 points... Let's go team!!
Hey friend, how are you?
I am well how are you and what's up?
I am good too, nothing much we lost the game.
How?
we remained quiet throughout the game because we were paying attention but still my team lost.
Don't worry, you will win next time.
I finally talked to Jan after a few weeks.
How are they doing?
They are doing very well. They bough a house!
Wow! So they are a homeowner now!
That is awesome! They should give you a tour.
They will next time they're in town.
Yeah, the opening was a big hit!
Tell me about the opening.
Well, everything went smoothly.  The crowd size was perfect, and they really responded well to all of the end displays and the window display.
Nice. Was Robin there?
Yes, she was the real hero of the day!  She planned everything, burned the candle at both ends getting ready for the opening, and stayed all day for the event. That's why I am letting my little hero sleep in today.
Sounds like Robin deserves the rest!  Congratulations on your successful event!
Did you see how great Robin's new business did on opening day?
Yeah, that was an awesome opening!
I know, I am really proud of her and thought she deserved a break.
I agree, what kind of break did she end up getting?
I let her sleep in, I thought that could be the least I could do for her.
That is really nice of you and I am sure she will appreciate it!
I am working two shifts today dear, can't meet them for lunch
I thought you had your meetings scheduled for today.
I know, but I am sitting in for Robbin. He worked so hard the whole week and I had to let him sleep today so that I could cover up for him
Well, that's quite understandable, maybe you should plan your meeting for some other time
I guess so, I'll let them know when I'm free
Sure enough Kai
Ash speaks Korean too.
That's awesome! Is he from there?
Yeah, he is. I hadn't heard Korean since I moved here.
What are the chances!
I lived there only until i was two but my mom made sure i learned it
I am glad you found someone to speak Korean with.
Ash really depends on me a lot.
I don't blame him. You are a great friend to have, for sure.
Thanks. Actually, he depends on me because he speaks Korean.
Oh. So, he doesn't know English?
No. He does, but he never hears Korean here and feels more comfortable because of that.
That makes sense. It's got to be difficult coming to a new country and everything.
Ash just got here from Korea. She is learning a few words, but I must speak to her mostly in Korean.
It's good that she has you to help her understand what is being said.
How do think I can help her learn English faster?
Why don't you speak to her in Korean and then repeat it in English.
That's a good idea, that is how I learned.
I was almost hit by a car today when I crossed the street if you can believe it.
I mean, I can believe it because you are always looking down at your phone when you walk.
I looked for a second man, and plus I swear I looked and no one was coming.
Well, they came around the corner and you have to be more vigilant next time.
Yeah, I mean, it isn't like I want to be put in the hospital from getting hit you know.
Yeah, I know. Please be more careful.
I think I'm gonna have to start practicing better pedestrian traffic observations.
You do because you were almost hit today.
I'm just used to not doing such a great job at following the rules.
You're gonna have to stop that because it's getting dangerous out there.
If you're with me and see me not following the laws just pinch me or punch me.
Anytime someone gives me a free pinch or punch I'm in.
Dang. I almost got hit by a car today.
Oh, no! Can't believe there was a car. No one drives through here.
Got so used to no one driving here I never look.
You always need to look both ways before crossing the street.
My mom always told me that. Don't tell her this happened. I'll never hear the end about how she was right.
Mums know better.
I donated all my old clothes to the homeless today.
That's wonderful. You had a lot of designer stuff.
I also donated all my kids old clothes.
There's a lot of kids that could use quality clothing.
I could have made a lot of money selling them, but I don't need the money.
It will be paid forward immensely.
I always think about and empathise with those who are less fortunate than me.
Indeed, it's always important to put things in perspective.
I have a whole treasure trove of old clothes that I never even use. I felt guilty having so much when others have so little.
You said you had a bunch of old clothes that you never wear. Do you plan on doing something with them?
I already did. Today, I made a trip to Goodwill with bags full of used clothes and donated all of them.
Then you accomplished something worthwhile and should feel proud about that.
I am on a mission.
Tell me about your mission.
I want to donate all of the clothes for those that have none.
Have you completed your mission?
I accomplished that purpose.
That is an amazing gesture. You're very generous.
The other day I was baking in the kitchen and I turn around and Riley was standing there with icing all over her face.
Oh my gosh! I bet she was so cute though!
Yeah she was, but it was a mess! I had to scrub her face and hands off.
I am sure she did not enjoy being cleaned up.
No! She was so upset with me about that, but she loved the icing.
I bet. Kids are the craziest!
I've been in Cambridge since 2013.
Why did you move there?
Way back then I needed a change in my life direction.
Did it work?
It did and now I am thinking of moving back!
Wow. Well, that is a big decision!
I am so glad I moved 7 years ago
Why did you move, by the way?
I really needed a change of pace in my life
I see, where did you end up moving?
I moved to Cambridge, it was in 2013
That was a good idea, it is quite nice there
I've been living here in Cambridge since 2013.
What made you do that?
I needed a change of pace in my life.
Did you find it here?
I did. I love it here.
I'm happy you did.
I think I am all ready to take the test
Are you sure? It is easy to miss questions.
I missed three, but I looked them up and I know the answers now and I know I will do fine
You should take it one more time just to make sure you will understand it
Sure, I guess it's no problem
Riley's over here right now, I'm just taking a break from studying.
What's the subject you're doing?
American history, Riley's giving me a pretty good quiz to ensure I pass the exam
I hope you do! You got my best wishes with that.
Thanks, speaking of which, I better get back to it, so I will talk to you soon.
Good luck with the studying and good luck with your exam!
I think I'm ready for my test tomorrow.  Riley quizzed me for a long time this morning.
Were you able to get the answers when he quizzed you?
Most of them, then I looked over the material I wasn't sure of.
I know it's an important test, so good luck.
Thanks.  I feel really confident going in that I'll do well.
I hope so!  Let me know how it goes.
We spent this whole weekend studying.
Do you think that you're ready for the test now?
Yeah, I'm ready for the test because of all the studying I did.
Well, good luck on it and I'm sure you're gonna do well.
Riley did a great job quizzing me and teaching me everything I needed to know.
Riley is a great teacher.
I stayed up all night to finish up the project.
What was the project?
It's something I needed to finish for work.  I was working on the finishing touches.  We had to present it to the client today.
How did the presentation go?
The client loved it.  They gave us feedback so we'll make the changes and make another presentation next week.
Cool.  Sounds like you are making good progress.
I haven't slept in two days, but at least I finished the project.
It would be better to start working on projects earlier, Bailey.
I know, but there were more finishing details on the project that I expected and had to work through the night.
Well, the important thing is it's finished. You can catch up on sleep tonight after you submit your project.
I worked all night.
You must be exhausted.
I did it in order to get all of the finishing touches on the project done.
The project looks complete.
I'm thrilled with the result.
Mission accomplished, my friend.
Oh, wow! Am I tired after a long night like last night.
Yeah, you were up all night trying to get the project done.
I was, and most of it was for putting the final touches on.
It's great that you have such attention to detail there.
I think I am going to get a spectacular grade on this.
I hope so too as you need to pass this class.
I created this awesome system for the trivia app here!
Oh, this looks very fun to play and very easy to add questions.
I know, I put in a lot of work for this but I wasn't able to finish my actual assignment for school though.
You are a workaholic but I think you need to prioritize your schedule better!
This was way too much fun to build but I understand what you mean.
Next time let me know and I can help you with your schoolwork if you don't have time.
I created this system from scratch for Jordan!
You did! Did you have time to finish your own work at least?
Sadly not.
I created it from scratch.
Created what?
Oh I'm sorry. I created Jordan's System.
Oh that's cool.
Yeah but I don't have anymore time to finish it.
Oh ok.
I have been extremely busy lately trying to work on this system for Jordan.
Have you been able to focus on your own work?
No, I haven't I'm already past the deadline on one of my projects.
I think you overextended yourself helping Jordan
Yes, you're absolutely right I can't do that going forward.
You can't put someone else's work above your own next time.
I think I'm going to be in trouble at work.
Why would you be in trouble.
My co-worker Jordan was having problems so I decided to help him.
Did you not have time for you own work?
Yeah, I didn't finish my work, but I made Jordan's system from scratch.
It's better if you put yourself first next time.
I need to start eating now. I am so hungry.
Go ahead and grab a sandwich while we wait for the others.
Are you sure it's okay? Are they not going to think ill of me?
Oh that's fine, we're all friends here. No one will think bad of you.
Thank you. I'm sorry I forgot to eat lunch today.
Oh that's no problem, eat all you want. We have got plenty of food for everyone.
I had to eat. I'm sorry I could not wait.
Its all good, I figured you were starving.
I worked all day without eating, that's why.
The meal was good and there are plenty of leftovers.
Thanks, I'm coming by to get some later.
I'll be here all day.
I have been so broke lately. I got a free sandwich today though.
Really? How'd that end up happening?
The cook at the local diner is really nice, so after talking to him a bit, he was willing to hook me up with one.
That's awesome. Any luck on the job front?
I put in some applications and have one interview; just keeping my fingers crossed.
Well, good luck. I can give you a ride to your interview if you need.
I got a free sandwich!
How did you manage that?
I saw a really nice sandwich and I told the cook that I am poor and he was nice enough to give it to me for free!
That is very nice of them!
I know. I'm very grateful.
My friend Riley asked me to cater his family reunion, but he didn't have a lot of money to pay me.
Really?  What did you do?
Riley is my best and oldest friend, and his family is like my own family.  I was happy to give them a great catering service and I gave them a really huge discount so Riley could afford it.
That's great.  And also I bet that was great exposure for your new catering business.
It was, it brought me a lot of business and now I cater Riley's reunion every year for free.
Hey, would you like a job catering my wedding in four months?
I told Riley that I would do the catering for her family reunion.
That's very nice of you. If you don’t mind me asking, how much did you charge?
I said I would do it at a discount because we have known each other for so long.
That's really nice of you! I am sure you have saved them a lot of money.
I told Riley that I would cater for their family reunion.
That's very nice of you but do you think they can afford it?
I know they are going through a rough time so I said I would do it at a discount.
Wow Kendall! That's so nice of you!
I will try and do whatever I can for one of my friends.
I just gave Quinn some more money.
How much?
Just a couple of bucks.
Poor guy.  He is always strapped for cash.
I wanted to talk to their friend earlier.
What did you talk about?.
We just spoke about how we are.
How are you now?.
Better after talking to a friend.
I really need to talk with someone, I just don't know what to do about work.
I'm here if you want someone to listen.
I was hoping you would say that.
What is going on at work?
I just feel like it is such a dead-end job, I am thinking about leaving.
If you aren't happy there, you should at least see what else is out there.,
I had a crush on Bailey so I placed my hand near hers.  She pushed my hand away.
How did that make you feel?
I felt rejected.
Maybe it doesn't mean anything.
Maybe I just need to keep my hand to myself is what she's telling me.
You should talk to her.
It was nice of Sydney to take away the dishes.
Whilst sheis doing that we can clean up in here.
That's a great idea.
The sooner we clean up the sooner we can go and do the things we want to do.
Where do you want to go after this?
I'm not sure but we can talk about it later.
Where did my plate of food go?
Sydney just picked it up from the table and put it in the disposal.
Sydney? Wow, she has never picked up after me before.
Well I guess today is your lucky day! She didn't take care of mine!
You must not be as special as I am!
Don't get a big head over a dirty dish!
Wow, that food was amazing. I am so full!
Sydney has already started to clean up.
She is cleaning all the dirty dishes?
Yes. I've never seen her do it before.
We are very lucky then!
Wow, that was such an outstanding meal.
I spent hours on it. I am so glad you enjoy it.
Thanks. I am in heaven. Time for a nap.
I will take those dishes and dump the remains down the disposal.
Don't I am still licking the plates.
Dude, that is disgusting. Just ask for more.
We should walk to school this morning.
Why? Why don't you just drive your car to school?
I'm bored of of driving. I just wat to try and walk.
That's good. It good for your health too.
Come on I do want to be late.
If we don't get to the location in time this whole thing will be messed up! How are we could to get there quickly?!
I don't know, we are going as fast as we can.
What if we took Lincoln road? Isn't that a shortcut to where we are going? It'd take us almost all the way there with no traffic
It is! Hurry, the road is coming up, turn and take it!
Done! There's no traffic on this road at all! We'll make it in time!
That was a good idea!
Get behind the truck! We have to get the girl.
She is over there on the street.
If they see us, we are going to blow our cover.
Put this mask over your face, so they don't know it's us.
I am ready to start this test and I am excited
Hey I have never seen you in this class are you sure you're in the right spot
I'm not sure. What class is this?
This is calculs for people usually two grades a head of you
Right, I'll be leaving now
Alright.  everyone makes mistakes so it is okay
Hey friend, how are you? what is going on?
Hey Kendall, I am fine thank you. How are you and what is going on?
I am well, going fine.
So tell me how was your test?
I was in the wrong class and did not realise it till the rest of the class started to write a test.
Oh.. is it?
Jesse  has had my keys  since yesterday.
What did she need your keys for?
She just wanted a toy to play with the cat.
You should call her and ask her to bring them now.
Have you seen Jesse play with her kitten? It's clear she loves it so much.
I have. They're adorable to watch together.
The other night Jesse needed some keys to be able to play with her cat. It was so silly watching her, because she didn't have any keys.
I can imagine. Jesse can be very emotional.
I gave Jesse some keys, though, so she was able to play with her cat.
I'm sure the cat was just as happy to play with her.
I forgot that I gave my keys to Jesse.
Did she need to drive somewhere?
No. She was playing with the cat.
The cat loves playing with the keys?
Yeah. The cat seems to enjoy having somebody dangle it.
I don't understand cats. That's why I have a dog.
I was so worried about this exam.
Me too, how did you do on it?
I wound up with an A, originally I thought I'd failed.
That's a nice surprise!
Turns out I was all stressed out for nothing.
At least you can be relieved now.
The three books looks interesting
Just choose one to read.
I don't know which one to choose.
Maybe you should go for Gulliver's travel.
Oh!, That will be better.
Nice.
I bought three new books. It took me two days to figure out which one to read first.
That's funny. I guess it's too much of a good thing.
Yeah, I lost two good days of reading because I was arguing with myself.
Ha ha...you better be careful, they have places they put people who argue with themselves.
I can't decide between three books to read.
Just pick one.
I do have a ton of time right now.
It's all good man, they all look great.
Why don't just use audio books.
That way one could read all them.
Which book do you think I should read?
The one you don't want to read.
That's an odd way to choose.
If you want to expand your mind you have to get outside your comfort zone.
Casey called last night and said she wants to move back in with me.
How do you feel about that?
She's a great roommate.  I had a good time with her.
When is she moving back?
Next couple of months.  She found a better job here.
That's a good reason to move back home.
I want to move back in with Casey.
Oh, I'm so happy to hear that. I've missed you very much.
Yeah, I miss you too.
I knew it was a mistake to move away from Boston.
Glad you're back, Skylar. But I thought you hated the big city! Did you just miss us that much?
Of course I did! But the main reason was Casey. She was such a great roommate. We got along very well together and had no issues.
Yeah, a good roommate is hard to find these days. Everyone's just so closed off.
Not Casey! I'm glad I moved back. We've been having a lot of fun and haven't missed a beat!
Good for you. Hope I can find a fun roommate some day myself!
I'm so glad you decided to go to the concert with me
I always wanted to see this band so i really don't mind
Did you know they're coming out with a new album next week?
I'll be sure to pick it up as soon as it hits the store.
I know you're not a fan of them but I really don't want to go alone.
I'm just not really in the mood.
Come on, we always have a great time at concerts when we go together.
That is true, we had tons of fun last time.
Exactly, so come on and let's go to the concert together because I don't want to go alone.
Okay, let's do it.
I still got my father's watch with me.
What are you planning to do with it Skylar?
I want to pass it down to my child one day.
That's nice, It's like a family treasure.
Yes, it has a lot of sentimental value on it.
Well, Good luck Skylar.
My most prized possession is my father's watch.
That's sweet that you feel that way.
Yeah, I miss my father. I want to pass it down to my kid someday. It means a lot to me.
I'm sure your kid will really appreciate it.
I am getting my Dad's watch fixed.
The gold one with the blue face?
Yeah, the battery died, and I want to pass it down to my kids.
That is really beautiful.
Thanks.
I had to go to the pawn shop to get my dad's watch back.
Who pawned the watch?
The very child I want to pass the watch down to.
It seems like they have no interest in the watch.
That might all change when they get older.
They are already 15, though.
Hi. How are you today?
I am good how is your mom?
She is doing well today.
That's great news.
Tell Robin that I'm so happy she looked after her.
The home nurse for Mom is great.
Does she do lots of things?
Robin helps out with Mom while I am at work.
That's nice that there is someone there
Yeah, Mom likes her a lot also.
That's good, does she cost a lot?
Robin was a big help to me and my mother.
It's no big deal. It is her job after all.
She goes beyond her job and does the dishes and laundry.
 It keeps her busy. Your mom also sleeps a lot.
Hey you!
Yeah?
Why did you belittle my performance??
It was horrible! You can't dance.
Ok. Well thanks for the honest feedback.
You should keep working hard.
I got so mad at the audition yesterday.
Did something bad happen?
I had a great performance at the audition, but somebody insulted me.
That doesn't sound like the response you wanted.
No, so I called them out, they were so embarrassed.
I'm glad you stood up for yourself.
Ash is back form his three weeks off.
How much did he miss?
Quite a bit but I managed to catch him up with everything.
That's really nice of you.
I had to fill Ash in with what happened in the last 3 weeks.
Was Ash out or something?
He was off sick for 3 weeks
That is quite a long time to be off.
I got him caught up on what had been going on around here so we have nothing to worry about.
Last Thursday I went grocery shopping and I bought some shrimp and oysters for a stew, but I think they were already spoiled.
Really?  Why do you think so?  Were they nasty?
No, they tasted great, but after I ate dinner that evening I was up all night with really bad stomach cramps and then I started throwing up all the next morning.
Oh, no!  Spoiled seafood can be really bad for you, it's probably the worst kind of spoiled food you can eat.
Really?  Do you think I should try to sue the supermarket for selling me bad food?
I don't know, but let's look up some attorney phone numbers and start making some phone calls!
I just bought some food and it had spoiled before I got home. It was so gross.
Where did you get it from?
I bought the package at the store and it was already spoiled.
Did you take it back in to the store.
It was nasty so I threw it out.
That is probably for the best anyway.
Are you serious? Coming after me for a penny!
Everything fifty-fifty remember? That was the deal.
Go outside. I'm sure you will find a penny on the ground somewhere.
You go outside and find one. It is your part of the bill and you're always shorting me.
What kind of friend are you? I'm really trying to save money.
A good one, letting you move in here with me. You are always short on the bills. You owe me $23.01 not $23.00.
Let's go to the casino.
Don't you think we should save some money instead of gambling it all away?
I've never been good at saving, money is for spending.
Ok. Let's go hit the slots.
I'm feeling lucky today, we might hit the jackpot.
That would be great since last time we lost big.
Have you seen signs up around the neighborhood for the new neighborhood watch program?
Yeah. I was thinking of joining.
Guess who organized it? I did!
You're the one who put together the whole program?
Yeah. My neighbors' houses kept getting robbed and I wanted to do something before the criminal came to my house.
I'm glad you're getting involved.
My neighbor John's house was robbed the other day.
That's scary, his house is right next to yours right?
Yeah, I've started a neighbourhood watch since this is the second robbery in a month.
That seems like a good idea.
I already have a few people signed up.
I'll bet John is one of them.
I took my bike off road yesterday.
How was it?
I had a great time, but it was pretty dirty.
Did you have to clean your bike when you were done?
Oh yeah, it was filthy.
I bet it was.
I used that new program, Blender, this weekend.
Oh yes, you've been talking about learning that, how did it go?
It was great! It was easy to render every frame.
Was it for that movie you got hired to do?
Yes.  I finished it on Sunday.
Cool, can't wait to see it!
Hello friend, I got a mail that we have been hired for the movie.
Which movie is that?
The animated movie we gave a proposal on.
That's good. So what's the plan?
I already use our program to render every frame of the scene in the movie.
Fantastic!!! I'm so relieved.
I did every scene in our new program.
Wow! This is pretty impressive.
It took longer than I wanted, but we need to make a good impression to build our brand.
This is Pixar quality.
I hope the client thinks so.
They have to, the attention to detail on things like the fabric and hair is amazing.
I'm so thankful that Jordan was here to help.
This means you have good news for me?
I have some great news for you, we found the dog
That is awesome because that little dog cannot be lost for too long.
Definitely wouldn't survive on the mean streets
Goes back alleys would take that dog down.
Thank you so much for helping me find my dog. You are a huge help.
No worries I know how it can be when you lose a pet.
Yes, they are like family. I had this dog for a while so to me its family.
Yep same with me I know I would be crazy if I lost my dog.
Thank God Jordan was here!  He helped me to track down my own dog, who was running wild through the neighborhood for an hour.
Helpful sort that Jordan.  So you got the dog OK?
Yes. The pooch was a muddy mess, but we caught the mangy mut.
Mangy?
Well, not really mangy, but definitely muddy!
Well, good job!
I like your dress too.
I'm just so in love with yours.
It's from polo
Yea that's a great company.
What do you think I paid?
Fifty.
I'm glad that you talked me into buying this dress.
I told you that it looked amazing on you.
Even Sasha told me that I looked good at work today and she is the most fashionable person in the office.
I guess that makes me pretty fashionable too since I told you to buy it.
I am making you go shopping with me again the next time I am looking for a dress.
No problem, that's what friends are for.
I 'm glad I got a time slot but everyone seems to be asleep by now.
They all wake up once you start putting on a show for them.
I hope so, this could be my big break.
You've been working hard for this and it's all going to pay off trust me.
Thanks for all your support it means a lot to me.
I'm always going to be here for you girl.
That stupid Addison. She gave me the worst time slot at the horse show.
What time did she did she give you?
She gave a slot at the very end. Everyone's tired and cranky and they won't be paying much attention to me.
Is there someone you can complain to? That doesn't seem right, at all.
It's not right but I can't prove she did it on purpose. But, I'll get her back for this.
Well if you need help, let me know and I'm there!
Addison scheduled my in for the end of the race!
Why would she do that?
I don't know. It might be a mistake but I was meant to be on at midday. Now everyone won't care because they will be tired and want to go home.
You are amazing. I'm sure you will hold their attention until the very end.
That's very nice of you to say. 
O.K, I'm checking out.
That's what you're getting--milk and cereal.
I don't have time for a big breakfast tomorrow morning.
So you're getting children's food?
Hey, a lot of cereal are good and not just sugar coated flakes.
I see you've got sugar coated flakes there.
I knew I would not have time for a big breakfast in the morning.
So what did you do?
I just got myself some milk and cereal from the store.
I like milk cereal myself.
I am in a rush for work this morning.
Did they call you early today?
Yes I even had milk cereal for breakfast, bought it from the store because I knew this was coming.
Good thing you were prepared.
Yeah, I usually like to make a big breakfast  but it was impossible this morning.
Time flies in the morning so wise choice.
Now that I'm going back to work, I am worried I won't have enough time to eat breakfast in the mornings.
I know how much you love your eggs for breakfast!
I picked up some milk and cereal so that I can quickly eat before heading out the door.
That's much more practical for sure.
I'll miss my eggs, but at least I won't be late for work!
Sorry I am late.
Why were you gone for so long?
My son got something stuck in his eye and I had to take him to the doctor.
Is he okay? 
Yes it was just an eyelash.
I am so bummed that I missed my daughter's birthday party.
Did they have you buried in files at work?
No. I had to take my son to optician after he injured his eye.
That was quite the dilemma but you made the right call.
I know. She is going to want my head on a platter.
Your daughter is very sweet. I am sure she will understand.
I'm finally home.
Where have you been? You missed the party.
I had to take my son to the doctor. He had something stuck in his eye.
That's a shame. Is everything alright?
He will be fine. He just needs some eye drops.
Well that's good news.
They are brown.
Brown eyes are great.
They are good but I like yours too.
They are blue.
I wish I had green eyes.
Me too.
He was kind of creeping me out last night.
Why was he creeping you out? Did he do something wrong?
He was trying to figure out the color of my eyes but it was weird.
It kind of sounds romantic.
It kind of was. I guess he's a little weird but that's what I like about him.
Are you going to see him again?
I had so much fun playing with you guys today.
I had fun to, the monkey bars were my favorite.
How about we do it tomorrow, I can meet you here again.
Yeah, and we can play baseball tomorrow too to keep active.
I had so much fun playing with my friends.
Yeah ,we should do it again sometime with them.
Lets do it again tomorrow. We can ask everyone else.
That sounds great. We should play baseball this time.
That sounds really fun, we have enough to play different teams.
That is true. Plus, we could even bring drinks for everyone.
I had so much fun playing games with my friends that we are going to play again tomorrow.
What did you guys play?
We played games online.
Are all of your friends gamers?
Yes, we all play, but not all the same game.
That sounds like a great time.
I've seen this play on a movie I watched last night.
Don't be dumb and try making your own plays Alex.
I think it will work and they will never expect it.
The coach is going to be annoyed if you do this.
Not if I score the touchdown.
I am so sick of this game.
What're you talking about Alex?
Football. Playing running back. I am sick of all of it.
What are you doing?!
I'm running my own play!
You're going to ruin the game!
The running back killed my mojo.
You are a good player, what happened?
They disrupted the game.
How did they do that?
They just deviated from the play and stopped it.
That's a dumb move on his part.
Skylar's mom is so kind, she gave me a ride home from the dance.
I got a ride with my friend Mark. I'm glad you got home safe.
Yeah my parents are still out of town.
I hope you sleep okay tonight given the situation.
Yeah I will. I text my parents every night.
Great, I'll keep in touch.
Sasha bought me tickets for tonight's basketball game! I'm so excited!
That's awesome! Are you and her going together?
No she just gave me both. I can take whoever I want.
I have a great idea on who you should take.
Oh really? Who's that? It would have to be someone who loves basketball as much as I do.
It's me!
Sasha bought my tickets.
Okay great I already got mine.
Sasha came over and handed them to me.
Are you excited for the big game tonight?
Yeah I haven't seen baseball in so long.
Let's make a bet.
I brought some extra pencils for the test today since we were low.
That's great, I saw that we were low but forgot to bring extra.
I'm going to give every kid at least three pencils so they don't run out.
You're an amazing teacher to them.
Did you know that the school keeps running out of pencils for the children?
How could that happen? Is there some kind of pencil shortage?
I'm not sure, but now I just buy the pencils and supply them myself.
That's good of you to do, how are the kids supposed to work with no way to write?
They sure do need them.
Does the school reimburse you for the cost of the pencils?
I followed Quinn during the battle and we slew a lot of enemies.
Quinn is quite the fighter.
Yeah, he spotted all the openings the enemy had.
Will you follow him during the next battle?
Of course, he's so skilled.
I think you'll learn a lot from following Quinn.
We won a huge battle today.
What type of battle and with who?
It was a video game battle that I followed Quinn into.
That sounds like fun.
Yeah especially since we won.
I'm happy for you guys!
Jan! Why the hell did you throw me back in the penalty box?
I told you, Aubrey, no more slashing the goalie with your stick.
I couldn't help it! I think they were cheating!
Well, there's no proof of that so the burden is on you, so you will sit in the box for 10 minutes.
That means you've got about 10 minutes before I get out and slash your head for being a donkey!
You do and you can sit the whole hockey game in the box, doesn't matter to me.
I think the referee is picking on me today.
They were making bad calls all game.
I feel like our team has a target on their back.
Hopefully that's not the case because your season could be ruined.
If we want to win we just have to fight the refs as well.
That's the attitude to have and you'll be all right.
I really don't think I deserved to be sent to the penalty box.
I don't know. I mean, after that last foul, I don't blame them.
That wasn't my fault. Jan just blames everything on me.
It was your second foul and the game has barely begun.
Whose side are you on anyway?
Only the side of the truth, my friend.
I had to go back into the Penalty Box during the game.
You said back. You'd already been?
Jan put me back in after my second foul.
So you'd already had a foul in the game?
It was called a foul. I don't see it that way though.
That's too bad when that happens. Just try to avoid that kind of behavior so you don't have to stay in The Penalty Box so much.
I think I'll go out with Cameron again.  It was a good date.
First date that went well?  Tell me more!
I met him at the diner for dinner and we talked.  We just seemed to connect.
Oh nice!  You love the diner.  Any sparks?
Yes!  As we were leaving, he gave me a peck on the cheek.
That's exciting!  Hope he calls you again soon.
Cameron gave me a kiss
What kind of kiss?
Just on the cheek.
That is so sweet.
I think he's a keeper.
Time will tell.
I really had fun tonight!
Where did he take you for the first date?
We just went to the movies and out to dinner.
Did he try anything?
He asked to give me a kiss on the cheek. A sweet guy!
I just wrote a detailed article explaining Riley's perspective.
I would love to read that.
You can be sure to gain a clear insight into Riley's perspective.
Has the article been published?
You should be able to see it in tomorrow's paper.
I really look forward to that.
I was reading through and figured I give a thorough analysis of Riley's perspective.
What do you think of how she feels on the idea of immigration reform?
I believe she incorporates a lot of good ideas for having different paths to citizenship.
There's a certain crowd that also feels that there should not be those paths available.
While I agree that legal immigration should be the only way to go, I don't know about disincentivizing people that are here without their choice.
Yes, there is not an easy solution for that issue now.
So I went on a hike yesterday with Sasha.
Oh nice. How was it?
It was okay but Sasha was much faster than I was.
Were you having issues keeping up?
I really was! I had to hurry up the hill to catch up to her.
I bet you did!
I went hiking with Sasha and I have to say she is so experienced I could hardly keep up.
I bet you couldn't. She is so good at hiking.
I had to keep running to keep up with her as the trail inclined.
I would have just given up and waited at the bottom.
I almost did but I wanted to make it to the top!
You are more determined than me !
I went hiking with Sasha yesterday.
How did it go? I know she goes hiking a lot.
It was really hard. She stormed ahead without realising it and had to stop and wait for me.
That's nice of her. How do you feel today?
I'm exhuasted.
I know I have been acting distant lately, but it is for good reason.
Is everything alright with you? I have been a bit worried honestly.
I am fine, but it is important that I keep my distance and keep a secret for now.
Okay, well if you need anything you know I am here to talk.
Of course and I promise I will come to you if I need help.
Ok good because you mean a lot to me.
I'm raising the temps here.
Why are you doing that?
It's so cold.
No it's not, I'm hot as hell.
Ok, I'll go get a jacket then.
Sorry friend.
It is way too cold in here so I am turning the temperature up a bit.
We were told not to touch it man.
I don't care, it is cold.
You are going to get in trouble and get all of us in trouble too.
No if I get caught I will say it was just me who did it.
Thanks because I really like this class and I don't want to get kicked out.
I hate being cold and our house is always freezing. My mom is a freak about not moving the thermostat.
I hate being cold too. I couldn't deal with it set so low.
The other day I moved it up a degree. She still hasn't noticed!
You better move that back or your mom is going to become furious with you!
I know, but I kind of want to see how long I can get away with it set a degree higher.
Your mom is going to get so mad at you. I would move it back before you get caught!
Hi, thanks again for inviting me over for dinner, I really appreciate it.
Oh it's no problem, I enjoy the company and I don't see new faces in church that often so it was a nice surprise, you coming to our tiny little town. Where are you from?
Well I grew up in North Carolina but I was also an Army brat, so we moved around a lot. I've lived in so many places I don't even think I could name them all.
So where did you live before moving here?
Just before moving here I was in Washington for a few months, before that I as in Virginia for a few months, and before that I was in Ohio for a few months. I still have a nomadic nature and don't stay in one place for very long.
Well that has to give you lots of stories and adventures to talk about.
I have changed location more than 4 times this year
Why that? you don't like places you stay?
I jus have this nomadic nature and couldn't settle down
You should try and control that.
I want to get even stronger.
Have you changed your diet?
Yeah, I'm eating more chicken.
That's good. It has a lot of protein.
I shouldn't have eaten so much before going to the gym.
What did you eat?
A whole rotisserie chicken.
How much did it weigh?
Minus the bones, probably two pounds.
Wow, were you excessively sweating during your workout?
I know what I'm eating tonight.
What is that?
I'm going to eat chicken for dinner and then I'm off to the gym.
Isn't it better to eat after working out?
I had a tasty fried chicken dinner tonight.
Sounds yummy, did you also eat mashed potatoes?
No, I cut out the carbs because I went to the gym after dinner and didn't want to be bloated.
Was the chicken enough food to get you through your workout?
The chicken gave me plenty of energy. I ate some more when I got home.
I think I'll start eating chicken before working out too.
I was so excited to help out in the Life Race.
Who does that raise money for?
That is the race to help support breast cancer.
My aunt died of breast cancer, so I know this is a great cause.
Yes, I was so happy to help support those in need.
That is wonderful, I'm proud of you.
I wanted to do something about a cause I believe is important.
What did you have in mind?
I wanted to raise money for breast cancer.
Did you have any ideas?
I took part in the Life Race.
That was very noble of you.
I need to find a way to raise money ?
Why do you need to raise money?
I need to raise money for breast cancer.
Okay, do you have a plan?
Yes, I'm taking part in the Life Race.
Good, that's a good plan.
I am interested in the Life Race.  It's to raise money for breast cancer.
When is it?
It's the last Saturday of next month.  Did you want run with me?
I think I am busy that weekend.  My friend is having her birthday party.  I'll donate to the cause though.
Cool.  I need to start running every morning to prepare.
How long is the race?
I am headed to the police station.
What are you going there for?
My friend needs me there.
You sure are a true friend.
I will do my best even I have to lie.
I don't think it's worth it.
I lied for my friend.
You told the police a lie?
Yes I had to lie in order for them to be safe.
You should feel a little bad.
I do but I felt awful for them.
I don't condone it.
I just went to the police station and told them a fake story.
Why would you do that?
I had to lie for my friend or else she would have gotten into a lot of trouble.
Aren't you afraid you're going to get punished for lying to the police?
I do. But I think I'll be fine since I got my story straight.
I hope you know what you're doing.
Tell me what's troubling you Taylor and I'll see if I can help.
I just feel like I'm going nowhere at work. I've been doing the same thing for three years now.
Have you talked to your boss about this? Maybe they think you're happy in your position?
Yes and they just keep kicking the can. I think they just don't want to train anyone new to do my job because I'm good at it.
Well, even before this you mentioned that you'd prefer to work in a different environment. Maybe this is the opportunity you've been waiting for. Spruce up your resume and find out what's out there.
That's a great idea. Thanks Lee!
I know you going through some stuff aren't you?
Yeah, I am. I just hate not being able to find a job.
Try to look at the positive side. You can only control what you can do.
Yea, I understand that. It just gets discouraging.
I definitely understand that, but if you keep doing the right thing, it'll be fine.
Thank you so much for looking at the positive side of things.
I am so glad we are finally here.
I know, it only took three hours to get here.
Okay let me open the door here.
No wait, I will open the door for you.
Thanks, I appreciate that.
Okay hand me your bags please, I will carry them.
Thanks for getting my stuff Jordan.
Your welcome, it was a long drive.
Yeah I am exhausted
I will finish unloading car and we can sleep.
It feels good to stand up after driving so long.
Yeah it does.
That was the longest ride ever. I couldn't believe it when we finally got to the hotel.
It really is kind of a long drive, though.
Not that long. There were road crews and detours everywhere. Then Jordan got my luggage and it took another hour.
Why another hour?
They couldn't find my reservation. They had to give us another room.
Sounds like a nightmare trip. Make sure no one puts you in a dungeon.
Finally, time to relax. It's a beautiful hotel, Jordan.
Let me grab your things and carry them to the room.
I can help you carry it. I'm anxious to hit the beach.
I want a short nap. It was a long drive.
We should grab a bite to eat too, then hit the beach.
At least we have a full week here to relax.
I've been working for 10 straight days
What for?
Just saving for college.
Let's take the day off to party.
Sounds good.
Work isn't everything.
I am so tired.
Have you had a bad week?
I had to work ten days straight. A lot of my co-workers have been sick.
Well, I guess you can at least be thankful that you are healthy!
I guess you are right. I'm just going to enjoy my first day off in a long time.
Yes, make sure to relax. You deserve it.
I signed up for a programming contest with my colleagues and guess what, we won!
You guys must be great programmers.
We had a good idea and we implemented it.  We were up against some tough competition.
What did you win?
We get a cash prize of ten thousand dollars.  The organizer is also donating a thousand dollars to our favorite charity.
Everyone wins.
Sydney why don't you ever listen to me?
I do listen to you, but I am my own person and sometimes I just need to do things my own way!
I understand that but when it comes to important matters you need to listen to me!
I am my own person Kendall and I will do what I want!
I have had enough of this I'm leaving!
Thanks for slamming the door on your way out!
There's something about babysitting and eating pizza.
I know, even Hollywood plays that in their movies.
Every movie or TV show the babysitter always gets pizza.
They go hand-in-hand like turkey on Thanksgiving.
That's a good analogy.
Once in a while I have something clever to say.
That was exhausting. I just got back from an intense game of basketball.
Basketball is a very demanding and taxing sport. You spend a lot of energy moving around.
I was playing point guard so I had to constantly bring the ball up the court and chase after the opposing guard.
And basketball games are pretty long as well so you're out there for quite a while.
Naturally, we were all tired and hungry after the game.
Do you have any plans for dinner?
Man I'm beat
Yeah that was a great game.
It was, how many rebounds did you get.
I lost count after 10, you were on fire with your threes.
I know, its like I had a magnet in the ball.
They really didn't stand a chance.
I have the perfect formula for success.
What does that entail?
I have ways to extend my power.
How do you do that?
It is as easy as making sure all of my opponents are either dead or disgraced.
Whatever works for you pal.
I was a Boy Scout until I graduated high school.
Do you lose membership after you become an adult?
I don't know, but I got every badge by the time I was 12.
Did scouting lose its appeal then?
No, since I helped younger kids receive their badges.
Does that organization allow girls into the program now?
I spent a lot of money online last night!
What did you buy?
A whole bunch of clothing, jewelry and cosmetics.
Why did you buy all those things?
Because I like to keep up with fashion and be trendy.
It would of been better to wait for all of that stuff to go on sale.
Look at all of this stuff I got for a little bit of nothing.
What all did you buy online?
I got some makeup, jewelry and some clothes.  All of it was pretty cheap.
What store did you shop at?
I bought most of this from Amazon.  There have a little bit of everything on there.
I love that shop.
I spent so much money today
I hope you didn't buy clothes again
I did, along with jewlery and cosmetics
I told you to keep track of spending
I know but they all looked so pretty
You need to check yourself
I'm not well like right now.
People are rude right now.
You need tor relax as well as others.
Just focus on work man.
Just focus on making money.
That is the spirit.
You know how I'm an honor student?
Yeah what about it?
And how I also play football and baseball and volunteer at the animal shelter?
Yes I know all about your accomplishments; what is your point?
I just wanted to remind you about all my accomplishments.
Consider me duly reminded.
I'm always so busy
What do you mean?
I do a lot as a honor student, I still play football and baseball in my spare time and also volunteers when I'm free at the nearby animal shelter.
Yeah, you got a full plate for someone in middle school.
Hey Liz, we need another hand at the animal shelter this weekend you in?
Sure, I wouldn't mind feeding some kittens.
Great about twelve should be good.
No problem, how do you find time for all of this, you pay so many sports on top of the schoolwork we get.
Oh its nothing really, I just like to keep active.
You're parents are the same way.
Hey! Are you hungry?
Yeah, we could do pizza if you want.
Ok perfect. We're the only ones here so we only need one pie.
Ok, do you just want to do a plain pie?
Sounds great to me.
Perfect. Make sure you order extra cheese.
I'm all alone tonight. I ordered a pizza.
It's a pizza and movie kind of evening.
Yeah, that's a good idea since there's no one here.
You can really let it all hang out.
I will. It's actually the best pizza place in town too.
Nice! I hope you enjoy it.
Tracy won't stop trying to talk to me.
What do you mean?
She keeps calling my name.
What won't you talk to her?
She's the one who got me in trouble at my job.
You should talk to her and find out why she did it.
The key to success is treating other people right.
I don't understand. How could treating people right help me?
Let me put it another way. If you scratch my back, won't I remember and be better disposed to you next time you need your back scratched?
Hm, that makes sense. Say, you're really good at talking to people.
It's really all about trying to make the message fit the person. See? I put effort into helping you, and in return, your opinion of me improved.
That makes a lot of sense, actually.
I heard that Rex has a new home now.
You didn't take Rex with you when you moved?
No, our new apartment doesn't allow pets. I left him with the neighbors, but they only wanted him temporarily.
That's so sad! Who took him now?
A couple that the neighbors know took him. I guess they were looking for a dog anyways.
Well that was lucky. Hopefully they are good to him.
I left the puppy behind!
Where was she when you left?
she went to play i never saw it.
I hope she is okay now
Yes! the neighbor already found a new home for the puppy!
That is relaxing.
Why is everyone so mad at me. Nothing I can do.
There's a lot you can do. You just don't dump a puppy. I shoud report you.
What else can I do if they will not take pets at the dorms?
You have so many families who would love a puppy.
I tried, no one wants this runt the shelters are packed.
Excuses excuses, I'll take to pup. There's a crowd out with pitch forks waiting for you.
I hope my students can pick up this lesson easily.
You're a good teacher so I am sure that they will have no problem.
I even wrote a note on the board so they can look at it if they need it.
You really deserve a raise for all your hard work.
Thank you very much.
I was trying so hard to make sure my kids understood the content.
I hear you! Sometimes it is hard to get the lesson across.
Yeah, I was writing the notes on the board.
I hear you! Did the students understand the notes?
Yeah, they understood most of them.
That is awesome! That is the best feeling.
I spend my weekends at the park. They have a baseball diamond where I can practice.
Well it's paying off. I saw you in the finals.
I was really trying, for the team you know.
You ran the bases smoothly.
Too bad we didn't win.
Well it was not for lack of effort.
I always practices the game so for the finals, I ran the bases smoothly.
Are you talking about baseball?
We had a final in baseball.  The coach wanted to see how we play in a game.
So he graded you individually.
He only grades us on how much we have improved.  He's not comparing us to other students in the class.
Interesting.
I am looking after a very sick patient.
Sounds like a lot of work.
As a nurse, my job is to monitor the patient's breathing.
Better you than me.
Hi friend, want to come bike riding with me? We can ride through the new forest trail in Foghorn Forest.
Wow! They finally finished it? Sounds like fun, okay I'll go get my bike.
Nice, you got new pegs on the back wheels. Hey lets cruise around for awhile before we head to the trail, yea?
Okay and yeah I bought the pegs just in case someone needs a lift. I thought you said you were going to stay inside today?
I was but then the internet went out because of a fallen pole and I was bored out of my mind so I rode around for awhile. There are a lot of people outside today.
Awesome, we should stop by the arcade and see if anyone's there that'll come with us before we head to the trail. It's going to be kind of scary going through there during dusk with just us two.
I'm thinking about talking to an adult about the food in the cafeteria.
Aubrey's parents work in the kitchen. Maybe you can talk to them.
I'm wondering if I should talk to Aubrey's parents or the principal.
The principal will just relay your message to everyone who works in the cafeteria.
Okay, I'll talk to Aubrey's parents about the food.
Great idea.
I just don't know which parents to pick for this experiment.
Well who did you have in mind?
I think Bill or Aubrey's parents would be ideal.
Then you should ask them both.
No. I've made my decision. I want Aubrey's parents.
That's a good choice.
Do you want to go to eat at the new chinese buffet down the road?
Sure, as long as they have those wontons I love so much.
I am sure they do, it looks like a normal chinese restaurant and most of them have wontons.
I bet they even have those tasty chickens on a stick that I like so much too.
Well why don't we get there first and then decide if they have everything your heart desires, ok?
Yeah I guess that sounds like a plan.
I'm famished and don't care what we eat. What do you have a taste for?
Doesn't matter to me. I saw a place down the road a bit.
How far down? Lets turn around and go back.
OK. I just want a burger which I think that place has.
OK. Sounds great. Lets go. I could eat a horse.
LOL. You won't eat a horse. We'll get a burger and fries.
I found a nice spot with my friend yesterday.
How is the food there?
The meal we had was delightful
Who referred you to the place?
My friends and I were feeling hungry while in town so we decided to try it out.
I can't wait to try it too.
i am sorry i dropped the engagement ring in the quarry
just try to help me find it the best you can
it is going to be hard with it raining out here and it is starting to get muddy
i dont think we are going to find it
unfortunately i do think it is gone somewhere
My friend gave me her engagement ring, because she wanted me to get it cleaned at the local jeweler.
I want to see the ring. Is it pretty.
I can't find it. I dropped it in my backyard.
Let me help you find it.
I spent all day digging in the yard, but I haven't found it.
I'm sure one of us will eventually find the ring.
I lost my engagement ring.
How did that happen?
I was at the quarry, and for some reason took the ring off to look at it closely, and I dropped it.
That doesn't make any sense.
Don't rag me--I'm exhausted from digging for the ring all day.
Appartenly with no success.
Remy is just the worse.
What happened this time.
I was trying to talk to him but he ignored me and remained silent.
He behaves like a child some times, how do you put up with him.
Well I love him so that's why.
Oh I see, well you should try to reach him using other methods.
Remy tell me why you killed the dog!
Yeah Remy, what the fuck is wrong with you?
Remy can you hear what I am saying?
Remy, answer the question.
I am going to kick the shit out of you if you don't answer me right now.
Remy, why have you done this? Answer us right now.
You're not gonna believe how my day went today
Why, how did it go?
I just got home. A very long and tiring one. I am just taking a bath and going to bed.
Oh, you poor thing, go ahead and the rest will. Tomorrow is another day.
Yes. Thank you for checking on me. I'll pray for a better day tomorrow
Okay. Good night.
This was a very long and trying day.
What happened to make your day so long?
I got to work at 7 and did not leave until 7. And everything was a little bit off.
Yeah, that sounds like a long day. What are you going to do now?
I took bath for an hour and now I'm going to have a glass of wine.
Sounds like you deserve it. Cheers.
Wow, what a long tiring day.
Oh yeah, you worked today right?
Yes, and it was brutal.  I came home and took a bath to relax.
That was a good idea, a good long soak must have felt great.
It did, I had a glass of wine after and then went to bed.
Sounds like a perfect night!
So why weren't you make it to the meeting on time agaIn?
I'm so sorry, I have been having car trouble lately, and my engine has been giving me trouble and I stalled out on the way here.
Well, in the future, since you know this is an issue, you should probably start leaving earlier if you can't get it fixed.
I know, and I feel really badly about being late. I was running behind this morning, but would have still been here early if not for the car.
Well, we really need you here on time, so this can't happen again.
I completely understand. I won't do it again.
I was late picking up Quinn today from school.
What made you so late?
My boss asked a question and I was 5 minutes late leaving and hit way more traffic than normal.
There must have been some hold up on the road that caused the extra traffic.
Yes. Road construction had started and I didn't realize it. I'll have to start leaving 20 minutes early.
I bet your boss won't be too happy about that.
So I had pic up Quinn today but the traffic was horrible.
I wonder why it was so bad today.
Im not sure but I sure do what traffic.
Yea I do too traffic is one of my biggest pet preves.
Sorry I'm late!
It's okay. Did something happen?
No, just had to pick Quinn up from school. Traffic was a nightmare.
Oh yeah, I heard there was a big accident on the main road. Did you see anything?
There were a bunch of cops and a fire truck around. It took me almost half an hour to move one mile.
Sheesh, that sounds awful.
I can't believe I did that.
Did what Riley?
I looked at him straight in the eyes to make them feel nervous about their performance.
Interesting tactic, do you think it worked?
I was home with my mom and dad when I found out.  It was one of the most exciting days of my life.
Do you have good news?
I got into USC.  It's my dream school.  I called my parents into the living room to tell them that I got in on a full scholarship for football.
They have such a great team.
I've been to most of their games. My dad also played football at USC when he went there.
I am so happy for you.
I hope this isnt about something bad
sounds like an important family meeting that you need to go to
I think it's about me skipping school and my dad found out
seems like youre going to be in a lot of trouble so i would try and be good
sounds like good advice
I really want to go get milk but I don't want to go to the store, Jordan.
Well, not a problem as I'll send my son to go to the store.
Okay, that would be excellent and can he look for some honey wheat bread as well.
I'll make a list for him to look and buy the items.
Thanks for your help as I don't think I should leave the house today.
My son is always willing to help us so it's not a big deal.
I need you to get 2 gallons of milk please!
Not a problem.  What color of label?
I need the dark blue label.
Not a problem.
Here's the cash, please hurry!
I'll be back as soon as I can!
I ran out of milk for my coffee.  Jordan's son came over and he wanted to go out to buy cigarettes so I asked him to pick up a carton of milk for me.
That's convenient.
I was happy about that.  I was tired and didn't feel like going out to the store.
If Jordan's son was going to get cigarettes anyways, I am sure he didn't mind picking up some milk.
Not at all.  He came back in like ten minutes.  He just grabbed it from the store on the street corner.
That was quick.
I spent the last 3 weeks asking her if I can have one.
Do you think that she is going to give in about the puppy.
No, I asked this morning and she screamed no to me, that I didn't take care of the last one.
Give it a few months and ask her again, maybe she will change her mind.
I saw a puppy at the mall the other day and wanted to take it hom so bad.
Did you ask your mom?
I've been asking her if we could buy it for days now.
What did she say?
She said no. So I just stopped.
You can always adopt a puppy.
Man, I was so lucky. I was able to protect my teammates from injury by seeing an accident about to happen!
Don't think it was just luck. Without looking ahead, you wouldn't have seen it.
Well, it doesn't hurt to be aware, but still, it's not like I was a hero or anything.
Yeah. I think you were. It's really remarkable what you did.
Hey, it worked out great, but sometimes these things happen by being in the right place at the right time.
I agree, but give yourself the credit you deserve here. You saved your teammates from injury by looking out for them!
I was so nervous. I thought I was going to faint.
The important thing is that you did it. That took a lot of guts.
They actually laughed at almost everything. I was shocked.
Why? Your stuff is funny, you know that.
Yeah, but you never know how a crowd is going to react.
I don't know about that. Funny is funny.
I was so nervous to perform in front of that crowd at the comedy club, I have never done that!
How do you feel it went? Did you like the place?
It was great, the owners and staff were so supportive, they all knew it was my first time in front of a crowd like that
It sounds like it went well, I wish I could have been there, I would have been your loudest supporter haha
I appreciate that, luckily it got real loud with laughter, turns out, I'm pretty funny HAHAHA
HAHA then you have picked the right career, keeping telling those jokes my friend!
I may have to change schools again.
You didn't get in trouble again did you?
I did but it was an accident.
Alex, they are going to send you to military school soon.
I know. I will behave at this one.
It was only a mistake; I'm sure you will do it this time.
I have to change schools, again!
Why do you keep changing schools? I hardly see you?
They say it is because of my behavior!
Have you ever thought of not acting up all of the time?
What the hell is that supposed to mean? Wanna fight?
See, that's what I'm talking about!
I hope that I wont have to switch schools so many times one day
I think so
You have been a great support in terms of trying to help me stay out of trouble mom
No problem.  I know that you are a good kid ,but to the school you are just a bad boy
I have been bad.  I need to get my life together
You really do
Hey, this is my last day here. I'm going to have to switch schools this week.
What? Why?! What did you do this time?
I pushed Billy down on the playground. He scraped his knee and told on me. They said it was the last straw.
What school are you going to?
I don't know. This is the second one this year though, they always move me around.
We're going to miss you, this is so unfair.
Thank you guys for defending me. they have been giving me problems for a long time.
im sorry that they have been doing that to you
they used to bull you last year didnt they?
yea, i took karate for about 6 months and i challenged them to a fight and beat them up.
wow, maybe i should take some karate so i could do the same thing
i would highly recommend it if you want them to stop.
Austin, they are picking on me.
Who is picking on you?
Those kids right there they made me cry.
No one messes with my little brother, hold on tight they will learn a lesson.
Thanks big bro those kids are mean.
Only I can tease you, you know that, they will regret teasing you.
This morning I was carried away shopping in the mall so I thought I would be late for work today.
Did you let your office know you would be late.
Unfortunately, I forgot my phone at home.
What did you do then?
I asked a favor of using phone from the gentleman I saw in the mall as soon as I realized I didn't have the phone.
I am glad it worked put for you.
I am so bored and I want to go out shopping.
Where did you go?
I ended up staying at home because my mom wanted me to.
You’re a good kid.
I realized it was late and she had no company.
I am glad you decided to stay home.
Riley is my hero.
He has always been my hero.
We got lost in the woods and he saved my life.
What did he do?
He used his survival skills and we made it home.
I knew that Boy Scout badge of his would one day pay off.
I am so glad you helped me out of the woods.
It was my pleasure.
How did you learn all those skills?
I was involved in Scouts and learned how to  survive in the wilderness.
That was truly amazing.
I'm so glad I could help you.
There are a lot of ways to get out of this mess hopefully.
Yeah Jan, we should start to use our survival skills that we learned at boot camp
I am going to get a flare and you make some firewood to el pme signal that helicopter
Okay....Oh wait I got something! The helicopter sees my phone light
Oh were saved now! I see them coming down to get us.  Thank you so much Riley you are a true trooper and a lifesaver
I know thanks
I'm really thankful to Riley for getting us out of the woods.
I can't believe you guys got lost.
It was really scary. But fortunately, Riley was able to use his survival skills to find our way home.
I am so glad you're both okay.
Me too. But I think it's going to be a while before I go camping again.
Or you can just make sure you go with Riley.
I was downtown doing some shopping and I saw Riley there with a man who wasn't her husband.
Did it look like it was a work thing or just a friend thing.
No, it was an affair thing. I called her husband and told him.
Are you kidding? You called Riley's husband? That's an awful thing to do.
I don't care. I don't like Riley or her husband. I thought it was funny.
You really are a jerk, Kai.
I saw Riley with another man.
Are you sure? She's supposed to be at a business meeting out of town.
It was definitely her. I wouldn't be calling you to inform you if I wasn't sure. I'm so sorry.
Where was she? And with who?
Purely accidental. I was at a new club the next city over. She was there with this guy. Don't know who he was.
I'm filing for a divorce. This isn't the first time she's cheated.
My class project turned out great!
You mean OUR class project?
Yeah, whatever Cameron. I did all the hard work.
Not even! We worked on it together and both did the same amount of work.
Well maybe we did the same amount of work, but my work was better so it counts for more.
You're so rude! Hopefully I won't have to work with you on a project again.
I am so glad that class project is finished, Cameron.
Me, too. It was a lot of work.
I took care of handing it in, so you don't have to worry about that.
Thanks, but did you add my name on to it?
I didn't know that you hadn't put your name on it, Cameron.
Now I won't get any credit for it!
Although we worked together, I felt like Casey didn't deserve any credit.
Why did you feel that way?
I was just jealous, because we both put in equal amounts of work.
I think you should change that and give the due credit.
I don't think Cameron will like this.
What?
So we both worked on the class project as a team, did equal work but I didnt give him any credit.
That's not cool Casey. Why did you do that?
My hair's gotten really long!
Yes, we need to get it cut. Sit in the chair, so the hair dresser can cut it.
OK. I hope my hair looks good after.
I'm sure it will.
My hair looks very pretty, Mom!
Yes, say thank you to the hair dresser and we can get going.
You like my new haircut? Doesn't it look nice?
It looks great! It must feel so wonderful after all this time.
It does. It was driving me nuts, it was getting so long.
I love what they did with your bangs. Where did you get it done?
My friend Robin got me an appointment at her buddy's salon.
Robin always comes through for you. She's such a good friend.
Hey! Thanks to Robin, my hair is finally short again!
It's strange seeing it this short, good strange though.
I know, but it had gotten really long since my last hair cut
Well I love it, are you trying any new styles?
Nope, only difference is the length.
Smart! No point in changing something that works!
I'm almost finished making the pasta, then we'll crack on with the sauce.
Of course, how many cans of sauce do you use?
I only use two, but it'll depend on the amount of guests really
And what else goes in to add flavour?
Well we have our onions, peppers, garlic and tomatoes. Then throw in your herbs!
That sounds delicious! I can't wait to try it for myself!.
I'm making lasagne, right now we're cooking the pasta.
Oh nice, so it's a lot of work going into this meal?
Yes but it's so worth it, homemade food is the best
I couldn't agree more! The pasta is looking great.
Once it's finished, we'll get started on the sauce.
The sauce makes the lasagne, or so I've heard.
I finally gave Jan her birthday present.
Oh yeah, what did you get her?.
A new vase! She knocked over her old one.
That's really thoughtful! I hope she liked it..
Well she had a huge smile when she saw it, so I think she did!
She's lucky to have you as a friend.
I finally gave Jan her gift.
What did you give her?
I bought her a new mug.
Was it like the one that you broke?
Yeah, I wanted to replace it for her.
She must have been happy to get it.
I'm going to be helping my dad out in the workshop today.
That's awesome, are you just his assistant or do you make your own things? 
I'm just his helper today, we're building a treehouse!
Oh wow, that's going to be a lot of work for you.
Yep! But it'll be worth it when I can relax up in the branches!
You'll have to show me the finished product!
I helped my dad, Carson, build things with my hands.  He's teaching me so much.
You guys work out of the garage then?.
Yeah, my dad turned the garage into his workshop.
What did you build?
We built these cool wooden hammers that we are going to auction off for charity.
That's so awesome.
I really like helping my dad out with building things.
Are you learning a lot from him?
I am. He's a really dedicated man of his trade.
Where are you guys building stuff?
We work out of dad's workshop, there's so many different materials there!
That sounds like a lot of fun.
Oh man my arms are so sore! I'm gonna feel this in the morning.
Why are they so sore? You were just at a concert.
I was cheering and singing and dancing all night long, waving my arms in the air. I thought they were gonna fall off, so I had to drop them down by the end!
That sounds like a fun concert, I take it you enjoyed yourself?
Oh yeah absolutely. You'll have to come next time they're in town.
So long as I'm off work, I will definitely join you. I'm jealous hearing how fun it was.
I had my arms raise for most of the concert.
Really, how long was the concert?.
About four hours, but I dropped my arms around three hours in.
I can't say I'm shocked, that's too long to have your arms up.
Yeah it wasn't my smartest move, really fun though!
It sounds it!
I had so much fun at the concert last night!
Oh yeah? You must be exhausted now though.
Yep, super tired! My arms are so sore too.
Why are your arms sore?
I had them raised over my head for practically the entire show! I had to put them down during the encore because they were getting weak.
Well you can skip your arm workouts this week then!
I've been feeling a little out of sorts lately, maybe I am getting sick
Give it a day or two, maybe your symptoms will go away.
I was thinking that too, but I actually think I am starting to feel worse over the past few days
Oh no, that's not good. Do you think you should see a doctor?
You're right, I should go and see the doctor in case something is really wrong
That's a good idea, let me know how it goes!
Thanks for coming with me. I hate going to the doctor, alone.
I know, I hate going to the doctor, period. Hate it. So why are you seeing him today?
I've been feeling really strange and my appetite is just gone. Plus, I keep getting headaches and body aches and they seem to be getting worse.
You're probably right to go see the doctor then. If it's nothing, it will at least ease your mind.
Exactly, better safe than sorry.
I have been feeling rough for a while.
Why? What's wrong?
My eyes have been watering, I've got a rash on my feet, and my arms ache.
Those are some odd symptoms.
And they keep getting worse. I think I'm going to go to the doctor.
Good idea. It sounds like you need medical attention.
Tracy told me to hold on.
Wait why?
I wasn't sure, but I knew in my gut that I was in danger.
Oh my god. Are you ok?
Yes, I'm fine.
Thank god.
Tracy told me to hold on for a second, it was weird.
What were you guys doing?
We were out for a late run, but all of a sudden I felt like I was in a dangerous situation.
Oh no, what was wrong?
We weren't sure at first, but then we heard a bang and we ran.
That's scary, I hope you're okay now?
I just finished de-cluttering my room. I am exhausted.
I bet it is worth it.
Yes. I've been meaning to clean out my room and put away whatever I don't use.
What do you plan to do with all the stuff you have stored?
Well I'll keep it all together for now, but maybe donate it if I don't use it.
That is thoughtful of you.
I finally cleaned my room out over the weekend.
Oh nice, I bet it's looking tidier now?
So much tidier! What didn't get thrown out is in my new storage bins.
That is such a smart idea.  I like where you are heading with that.
Great, right? So much easier when my stuff is all together.
Yeah you don't want to be looking everywhere for one thing.
I just need to get all this stuff packed up.
Are you moving back home.
No, I found another apartment.
That's brilliant! Just remember to pack things room by room.
For sure, it's easier to find cutlery in the kitchen box.
Beats finding it in the bathroom box!
I heard Robin was an expert on cats?
From what I've heard, yeah she is. Why?.
I want to get a cat soon, so I want to pick her brain first.
What kind of things do you plan on asking?
Just about diet and exercise requirements, the important stuff.
Makes sense! She's over at her desk, go ask her now!.
Did you see Kendall's black eye?
No, but I heard about it.
I was there when the bully smacked Kendall in the face! I couldn't believe it!  In our school!
That bully is in trouble....
I hope so!
Hope?  Kendall's dad is the District Attorney!   I see a future with one fewer bully in our town!
I feel so bad for Kendall. She's been getting bullied, and today she got a black eye.
That's so awful. I never understood how people can be bullies.
I never understood that either. What's the purpose of being mean to people.
I have no idea. I don't know why people seem to thrive on making other people miserable.
It's really pathetic. I hope they get in trouble for what they did to her.
Is she going to report it?
I feel so badly for my friend Kendall. He got a terrible black eye.
Oh, that's awful. How did that happen?
This kid at school gave it to him. He bullies Kendall relentlessly.
Poor kid. Why does he do that to him?
I guess just because Kendall's kind of small and doesn't fight back.
Yeah, bullies are very good at spotting the best victims.
My friend Kendall was just bullied again today
That is so sad.
His friends always tease him.
He should report that to the principal.
He did, but they gave him a blackeye.
That's awful, the teachers need to stop it!
I can't wait to see my best friends this weekend.
How long have you guys known each other?
We became best friends in elementary school, and we stayed in touch all our lives.
That's great that you have friends that you've known for so long.
Yes, they are really special. You should meet them sometime?
Yes, I would love to meet them. I keep hearing great things about them!
Even though we only saw each other every summer since I was ten-years-old, I became best friends with them.
Summer friends though, right?
More than that; we've stayed in touch all our lives via snail mail, then email, and vacations.
It must feel great to have stayed close friends for over 30 years.
It really does. I hope you can meet them when they visit this summer.
I'd love to; thanks.
It was awesome seeing my friend again, it'd been too long.
How long have you known them?
Almost fifteen years now, we were friends as kids and stayed in touch ever since.
Now that's commitment to a friendship!
It really is, not many people can say they've known someone for that long.
Very true, my longest friendship is only ten years long!
I'm glad I still have good friends, even if they do live far away.
Yeah, it seems pretty hard to make friends when you get older.
That's why it's important to keep in touch, we've been friends for twenty years!
I understand that, you need to put in effort to receive it!
I one hundred percent agree.
I asked Carson about the amazon rain forest, we just finished speaking.
He was away for three years, he must love being back.
He's really happy to be back and see everyone again!
I could imagine, how did he find the trip?
He loved every minute of it, he's matured so much!
It's great to hear he's doing well!
Carson went to visit the amazon rain forest three years ago.  He gave me a call when he got back!
Is he back in the city?
He told me he just got back and was reaching out to all of his friends.
What did he do in the amazon forest?
He's a researcher with the university.  He went there to study a new species of beetle!
Wow, that's amazing!
I feel a bit disoriented. I know this place well but after my accident, I get confused about where I am sometimes.
You might have some kind of brain injury?
That's what the doctors are telling me.  They said I had a concussion.
That could be dangerous!
Hopefully it passes with time, I trust the doctors.
Well I've got my fingers crossed for you.
My son is so afraid of needles
Did he get the shot still?
Yes, even if he whined a bit
I'm glad he went through with it
Me too, he needs to understand it's for his wellbeing.
well he is only 6,
It took so long for that boat to hit the shore yesterday, I just wanted to get home!
Really? How long did it take you?
Almost three hours, it was ridiculous.
That's way too long! You'll have to get a taxi next time.
Yeah, for sure! I'd even be warmer!
Well that's the benefit of hindsight I guess.
I took my boat over to the mainland yesterday for an oil change, then got home really late.
What were you doing over there all that time?
Well, I was waiting for the tide to come back in so it would be safe to travel across the shore again.
That must have been boring, just waiting.
No, I was okay. I walked into the village and had something to eat.
Ah, yes! Good food is the best way to beat waiting!.
I stopped someone for speeding the other day.
Oh really? How fast were they going?
Twenty miles over the limit, they were trying their hardest to get out of a ticket.
They always do! But this way they'll learn their lesson.
Exactly! Don't do the crime if you can't do the time.
That should be our new slogan.
I had someone trying to beg their way out of a ticket last week.
That's always fun, did you let them off?
No, I'm a stern cop. I don't brake that easily.
Well that's fair, it's their own fault.
Exactly, I'm just out there doing my job. I don't have time for people ignoring their crimes.
Well at least you can take pride in a job well done!
I stopped a driver for speeding through a school zone today.  It was hilarious.
Why?  What did the driver do?
Both he and his girlfriend or wife were begging and pleading with me to just let them off with a warning.  At one point they were both actually crying like little children.
Hahaha!  Really?  How fast were they going?
They were going forty in an area posted for twenty five.  It wasn't such a huge ticket but one rule I have is that no person who speeds in a school zone gets off with just a written warning.  They all get a ticket.
That's a good rule.  People should have more sense than to drive dangerously when there are little children anywhere in the area.
I can't be too lenient on anyone, or they will all expect to get away
But surely some people have good reasons?
Sometimes, yes. But this driver kept begging me to let them off and that's not good enough for me.
I'd say that's fair, if they didn't have a reason then there's no excuse.
I started attending a new school.
Had you been there before?
No and I felt lost.
What did you do?
I asked Remy to show me around.
That was very nice of him.
I had a great first day at my new school.
Did you meet any nice people?
The teacher picked a girl named Remy to walk with me to all of my classes and eat lunch with me.
I am sure that made you feel a lot more comfortable.
Remy introduced me to some of her other friends and we all walked home together after school.
You are a great friend and they are going to be glad you are at their school now.
It was great to get shown around by Remy today.
He’s always a very helpful person.
This was my first time getting to know him and I look forward to developing a long lasting friendship.
Definitely a person that you wanna make friends with.
How was your day today?
Got a few classes and then had a meeting afterwards.
I had my first day at school, and Remy showed me around.
I'm glad you had someone to show you around.
Me too. It's a big school, so it was nice to not be on my own.
Do you feel like you know your way around now?
Pretty much. It'll probably take me a few days to feel really comfortable.
I can understand that. But before you know it, you'll feel right at home there.
I met Remy on my first day at school and she was so nice.  She showed me around the campus.
That's great you are making friends at your new school.
It's hard at first because I didn't know anyone, but people have been pretty friendly.
You are a very charming guy.  People will be nice to you.
Not always.  There are some mean people out there.
That can't be helped.
I asked my parents what was the reason for the divorce.
Did they actually give you a reason?
No, they just skirted around the situation and gave me typical talking points.
Perhaps in due time you’ll know.
I personally like to know now.
I think you'll have to be patient, at least until your parents are ready.
So Cameron asked me out on a date yesterday evening.
He finally asked you! I hope you said yes!
Of course I said yes, he's so cute! Even I could tell he was nervous though.
Well that's understandable, rejection hurts. What are you going to be doing on the date?
We're going on an evening picnic, do some star gazing while we chat.
That's so romantic, I hope you have a wonderful time!
I felt like such a clumsy person today.
Why? What happened?
I was carrying a tray of food, and I dropped it on the floor. I was so embarrassed.
Oh no, I'm sorry about that. Did you at least pick it up?
Oh yes, I picked it up immediately, hoping no one else noticed that I dropped it.
That's good. I'm sure no one noticed, and you did the right thing by picking it up.
I dropped my tray at lunch, my food went everywhere.
Oh no! That would've ruined my day!
It almost did, but I picked the food up and carried on like nothing happened.
Calm and collected, as always I see.
Well as the saying goes, no point crying over spilt milk!
I dropped my lunch all over the floor at lunch.
That's embarrassing. What did you do?
I tried to pick it up of course. Looking even dumber.
Oh that's too bad. Things happen like that in life, don't let it get you down.
Do you think I can still eat this tray of food?
It looks fine to me.
But I dropped the tray on the floor so it might have germs on it.
Did you follow the five second rule?
Yes, I picked the tray back up immediately.
Then all the food should be safe to eat.
Robin got me a coffee machine last week!
Oh that's so kind! How are you finding it?
It's saved my life, works so fast and minimal mess! I absolutely love it!
Robin really knows how to pick her gifts!
Indeed, it was exactly what I wanted!
Robin got me a coffee machine yesterday.
For a special occasion?
It was a birthday gift, it was exactly what I wanted.
Does it have all the bells and whistles?
It makes regular coffee as well as cappuccino.
I wish I had a machine like that,
After yesterday's shift I had to go and see my friend to relax.
Oh yeah? What happened at work that was so stressful?
Just everything being stuck, we couldn't actually work today.
That sucks, how do the two of you relax then?
We usually just play some video games, very therapeutic.
It sounds it, well I'm glad you enjoyed yourself.
Work's been stressful lately, so I've been over my friends a lot.
Nice, do you get up to much?
We just played some video games, nothing major.
That's a great way to relax!
I like to think so, fun too.
Well I'm happy you forgot about work for a few hours!
I ended up at my friends after work yesterday.
How come? I thought you were going straight to bed.
That was the plan, but I was too stressed to sleep.
Makes sense, so what did the two of you get up to?
We just played some video games.
Great way for you to chill out!
I was playing that new game all afternoon.
How was it?
Pretty good. I'd been stressed out from work and went to my friend's house and he had it.
Did it help you relax?
Yeah, it's an interesting game so I got my mind off things.
Sometimes you need to put your mind on other things to get stress relief.
I just wrote a big check to the hospital.
Did you have an operation?
No, I was paying off Kendall's bill.
I thought Kendall had a good job, why couldn't she pay it herself?
She's been unable to work since the accident.
That was very generous of you to help her.
I read an article about a family car crash the other day.
How did you find it?
It was a tough read. My parents went the same way, so I could relate to the article.
I'm really sorry to hear that!
It's okay. It just stings when I'm reminded of it.
I understand, well I'm here if you ever want to chat about it.
I was in tears over an article I read yesterday.
What was the article about?
It is about a family that lost everything due to Hurricane Katrina.  It is just so sad.
Hurricane Katrina caused devastation to many.
Yeah and I was just remember when my family lost everything when I was a kid to Hurricaine Hugo.  It was a disaster.
Yes that was a sad time for your family back then.
I'm glad that issue is sorted now.
Yeah I bet, you must've been stressed.
Stressed was an understatement.
Really? How bad could it have been?
Super bad, I couldn't do anything myself. I had to rely on everything out of my control to work.
Okay that makes sense, those situations are the most stressful!
Kendall was mad at me for not coming to the party so she has ignored me since.
Why didn't you go to the party?
I told her I would go with her but then last minute I changed my mind.
Did you tell her why you changed your mind?
I just told her I wasn't feeling it. I was really tired and wasn't in the mood to party.
She should respect that.
I rarely ever see Kendall anymore.
Why, what happened? You guys use to be such good friends.
Kendall got mad at me for not coming to her birthday party.
Was there a reason you didn't go?
I told her that I had something else planned for that day and she got really upset with me. We don't spend time together everyday like we use to because of that.
Well I sure hope you guys can work out your problems together.
Kendall's been mad with me ever since I skipped her party.
Why did you skip it?
I just needed a day to myself to recharge.
That's completely understandable, she needs to accept that.
We are back.  What a night!
Did you go to the library as you had planned?
Yes, but I had to take Cameron's friends with me.  They needed to do some research on climate change. So, I said I would take them.
Did they find what they were looking for?
Who knows. I left them there.  They were messing around instead of studying, so I couldn't focus.
Smart move. You don't want to feel like you've wasted your time!
So I ended up taking Cameron's friends over to the library for some research.
That was nice of you! What are they researching?
The effects of climate change. They have a project coming up for it.
Nice! A great topic!
They seemed to appreciate the help.
Hopefully they'll get good grades, all thanks to you!
Cameron's friends asked me to join them in the library yesterday.
Oh yeah? What did they want?
They wanted my help doing some research for a project.
What did they want to research?
The effects of climate change. They were all super engaged!
That's brilliant, they didn't go wasting your time then.
I've had a lot of work on lately.
Been busy for you then?
Non-stop. But that's the job, working hard has its own rewards.
You have always been dedicated to getting your job done promptly.
Of course, that's the only way to do it!
You are a brilliant employee.
I've missed so many happy hours lately.
That's a shame, why have you missed so many?
Work's been rammed as of late, I haven't really stopped.
Oh no! But props to you for working so hard!
If nothing else, I'm dedicated.
And the rest! You're a great employee!
I was so busy at work today.
Why so busy lately?.
We've just had a lot of work in for the past few weeks, it's slowly built up.
That's not good! But you're a dedicated employee, you'll smash through it!
I hope so, I really need to relax.
It'll be well earnt when it comes!
I've had to miss a few lunches at work lately.
Really, how come?
We've just had a lot of work on, so I haven't had the time.
That's a shame, but at least you're working hard to get it finished!
That's true, dedication has always been one of my stronger points.
Well keep up the great work!
Quinn had an art assignment due the other day, she passed thankfully
Always good to hear, what was the assignment on?
She had to draw something she considered beautiful.
That's a pretty broad topic, what did she choose to draw?
She drew my hands in the end, she kept telling me they were beautiful.
Not my first choice, but clearly it was good because she passed!
I had to help Quinn out with her homework last night.
What did she need help with?
She had to draw something beautiful for her assignment.
How did you help her out?
I let her draw my hand.
Did it turn out good?
Quinn had to draw something beautiful for her homework assignment.
So what did she draw?
She drew my hands, I guess she thinks they're beautiful.
Yeah they are!.
I hope she gets a good score.
I'm sure she will!
Quinn's a really good artist. I never noticed before.
Yea, he draws all kinds of things. He draws portraits and landscapes.
He drew my hands yesterday for our homework assignment.
That's kind of intimate.
I know, right? He said he had to draw something beautiful and that's what he decided on.
My mom has been too busy to take me for a haircut lately, but she said she's got some time at the weekend.
I can tell, your hair is crazy long!
It's too long, I really hope it gets cut.
Well just remind your mom that you need it cut
I have been, I don't want to wait anymore!
Smart plan!
My mom finally took me to the hair dressers to get my hair cut.
It's about time! Did she say why it took so long?
Yes, apparently she's just been very busy lately and didn't have the time.
I guess that's fair, everyone is busy sometimes!
I had to make another trip to the shop yesterday.
When I got back and checked the ingredients, I realized I'd forgotten the flour.
Not ideal, but at least you caught it before you started cooking!
Good point!
I checked for all the ingredients I need and found out I was missing the flour.
Did you go to the store?
Yeah, I had to go to the supermarket by my house to get some flour.
Bet you're glad to have that store so close!
It was a real life saver!
How did the cake turn out?
I wanted to bake a cake yesterday, but after checking my ingredients I noticed there was no flour!
Oh no! So you didn't bake anything then?
No I still baked. I just had to go to the store and grab some flour first.
You're more motivated than I would've been!
Well it only took fifteen minutes, might as well do the leg work for it.
That's pretty mature, I'm jealous!
I've gotten pretty close with Addison lately.
That's great! What kind of stuff do you talk about?
I'd rather not say, it's pretty personal stuff. Secrets, y'know?
Ah that's fair, good of you to keep it to yourself.
Well I want her to trust me, which won't happen if I go telling people her secrets.
I'm sure she really appreciates it!
I can't believe my boyfriend took me camping, but couldn't start a fire.
Oh wow, didn't we get taught that a few years back?
Yep, but apparently he didn't remember doing that training.
Must have been cold without a fire going.
Nope! After half hour or so of me laughing at him, I got up and started the fire myself!
He must have been super embarrassed over that!
My boyfriend failed at starting a camp fire the other night.
That's brilliant, so you went without a fire then?
Hell no! I went over and did it for him!
And that's even better, how did he take it?
He was a little embarrassed, but he quickly got over it.
Well I'm proud you could do something a man couldn't!
My boyfriend took me camping, but didn't know how to start a fire.
And it was his idea to go?
Yes. I think he just wanted to look macho.
That's funny. So you guys were out there with no fire?
No. I can start a fire. I walked over and got it going.
So you ended up being the macho one.
I can't believe Bailey took that personally.
Well you did break her and her partner up.
I was just trying to prove he wasn't a good person! Now she's trying to get back at me!
You could have just spoken to her instead.
I made Kai a doctor's appointment yesterday.
Oh no, what's up with him?
I'm not sure, but he said he'd been feeling ill lately.
Well he's gone to the right place to check it out.
The doctor's will be able to help him get better!
I've got my fingers crossed for him.
I had to split the teams into separate classes today, it was great!
Nice, what were you teaching today?
Rugby today! I taught each class a different aspect of the game.
Oh wow that's great!
They seemed to enjoy it, especially the wingers group.
I don't blame them, it's a great game.
I was trying to teach the teams about the game that I made up.
What did you do?
I divided the teams into classes and each class learned a different part of the game.
That sounds fun.  How did the class respond to the game?
The class enjoyed it.  I was trying to teach them about cooperation and competition.
That's very creative of you.
I had to divide the teams into classes today.
Why was that?
I wanted to teach them a unique part of a game.
That sounds like a good way to learn and focus in on it.
It was that way so they could figure out the parts of the game that worked and those that didn't.
I bet it was easier to have them work together as a team.
I was trying to make some dicey jokes the other day?
Dicey how?
Let's just say I would be in trouble if the wrong person heard them.
Well it's probably for the best if you don't tell those jokes.
Too late, I had to tell them.
Well if you get into trouble it's your own fault.
I was so exhausted after the race.
Did you win?
No, but I ran as fast as I could to keep up with the others.
That sounds tiring.
It was, I need to keep practicing so that I can get faster.
Next time I'm sure you will win!
I was really surprised I was able to keep up with the other runners.
You've worked so hard in your training, I'm glad it paid off!
I guess all the hard work does pay off eventually.
It probably feels good to know that it didn't go to waste!
I participated in a race this morning.
How did you finish?
Well, I didn't win, but I was able to keep up.
That's good.  You must be in shape.
Yeah, I've been running almost every day.
Wow, you are a lot healthier than I am!
It's really a good time to earn some cash.
Really, in this heat wave?
Yeah.
How are you earning?
I sold cold bottled water at high mark up yesterday, I made so much money!
Wow, I wish I had that idea first!
I'm rolling in the dough now.
Did you get a job?
Sort of, I was selling water during the heat wave.
How much profit did you make?
A lot, I set a high mark up price.
Now we can go out!
Screw lemonade stands, I made a ton of money just selling bottled water!
Yesterday was triple-digit heat, so I'm not surprised an entrepreneurial business person like yourself took advance of the situation.
I sold the water at a mark up too. I knew people wouldn't be able to resist during this heat wave.
If you really want to make a lot of money next time, sell bottled ice water.
Last night we had to rush over to a little residential neighborhood, there was a pretty big fire.
You were on that call? I saw all the smoke.
Yeah, it took us most of the night to put it out.
Another job well done! Excuse the pun.
You won't believe the day I've had!
I know you're a firefighter and there was a ton of smoke over the neighborhood earlier, so I'm going to guess that had something to do with it.
That's exactly what it was. I managed to get the fire under control and prevent anyone else's house from catching on fire.
Good job! The neighborhood appreciates the effort.
The team and I managed to get a pretty big fire under control last night.
Great work, where was the fire?
In the middle of a residential neighborhood, we had to act fast!
Oh no, was anyone hurt?
Thankfully not, we worked hard to ensure everyone's safety.
Well I'm sure every single person there was grateful.
I can't believe I was able to put that fire out yesterday.
I can't either. We were lucky, we're in the middle of our neighborhood!
I know right! So many people could've been hurt.
For sure! We have to be careful not to forget the oven is on again.
Seeing those flames spewing out is burnt into my brain, I won't be forgetting anytime soon.
Well I'm so glad you saw the fire, it could've been a lot worse!
It's been a crazy day, especially with this little one arriving.
She must've known where she was.
Even so her timing is impeccable, we'd just walked through the hospital doors when she was ready to come out.
Well I for one am glad, this little cutie is perfect!
She's got your eyes for sure!
She has your nose, thankfully!
I need a bed right now, the baby is coming.
Are you sure?
Yes the contractions are getting stronger.
Okay take a deep breath.
My water just broke! I need a bed now!
Okay, let's go over to the front desk.
I can't believe this one had such spectacular timing!
I guess she was ready to meet us.
Sure, but coming out the second we reach the hospital? That's perfection.
I bet she just didn't want to sit around waiting anymore.
Can't say I blame her!
We're lucky we arrived when we did.
I know this little one wasn't waiting around for anyone!
I knew she was coming any minute, but popping out as we get into the hospital is crazy for timing!
Let's hope she stays quiet for the next few days.
I'm sure she will be, she deserves the rest.
She's so cute.
I cooked the food in the oven for my family to eat.
Do you usually cook for your family?
I am the best cook out of my siblings so they want me to cook.
Do you mind?
Not at all.  I am going to study to be a chef when I get older and open up my own restaurants.
That's marvellous.
I cooked for the family last night.
Oh yeah, what did you make?
Ah just a roast, nothing fancy.
Well I hope they all enjoyed it!
Yeah it was fresh out the oven and everyone was ready to eat, they seemed happy enough.
Nice work, it's hard to please everyone.
It was my turn to cook for the family last night.
Nice, what did you make?
Just a stew, it was sitting in the oven ready for whenever people were hungry.
That sounds delicious!
It was okay, not my favourite meal.
Well either way it's good to hear you're cooking!
It was my turn to cook last night. I left it in the oven for when everyone was ready.
That's good. It didn't burn, did it?
Don't worry. It was on a low heat.
Always a win, I hope they all enjoyed it!
Quinn was put onto my project today.
That's awesome, you two love working together!
Yep, it's going to be fun! We spent the first couple hours just running through the project background.
That was smart, Quinn will be all caught up after!
Exactly, it'll save us a lot of time down the road.
Quinn was super happy that we get to work with each other again.
I bet, you two work so hard when you're together.
We had a pretty easy first day too. All we did was cover the project background.
That's still important stuff!
I guess, it will save me from answering questions all the time.
Exactly, you'll both do great!
I was happy to find out Quinn would be helping out on my project.
That's great, you two always did get on!
We're going to be working closely on this, so we ran through the project background before starting the work.
Smart move, you don't want any mistakes.
Exactly, that'll save us some time down the line.
Well it sounds like you've got everything under control.
I was so scared in the woods from hunting shack.
Did you see a wild animal?
No! I saw movements, grabbed my gun and took aim!
Did you see what walked across?
No!
There was something moving in the woods. I looked out of the hunting shack and saw movement so I grabbed my gun.
What was moving?
I put on my snow boots and heavy jacket and wet outside to check things out.  I opened the door and there was a bear standing on the front step.
That's must have been frightening.
I am a hunter so I am trained for encounters like that.
Did you shoot?
Have I told you about the storm last week that knocked a tree down in my garden?
No, that sounds horrible! Is everyone OK?
We're fine, but it was a lot of work to clean up the tree and fix up the garden.
I'll bet! I'm glad to hear everything is fine now. Did you plant a new tree?
Not yet, we haven't decided if we will or not.
Well, I'm kind of sad to hear about the tree falling. It looked really nice.
We are lucky to have survived the storm.
Thankfully the tree fell on the garden instead of the house.
I just need to chainsaw the tree into small chunks.
I will stack the logs over there.
The garden is already looking so much better.
See that didn't take very long at all.
That was a really bad storm!
It was, the wind tore down trees all over the place.
One fell down and wrecked my garden.
Oh no, are you going to fix it?
Yeah, it's going to be a ton of work.
I hope it's not too bad.
I went to my first art class last night.
Awesome, did you paint anything?
I did! We painted fruits and vases with some oil paint.
That sounds amazing, do you have any samples?
I'll send them to you later!
Thanks, I look forward to it.
I have always wanted to take an art class, and so I finally started taking one yesterday.
Really?  That's great!  Do you like it so far?
Yes, I already love it.  I think I'm going to make a good artist.
What kinds of things are you painting yet?
Well we were using oil paints, and we painted stuff like fruit and vases.
Fruits and vases?  To me, that sounds super boring!
I finally attended my first art class!
That's great, how are you finding it?
It was really fun, we painted a few things through the class.
Nice, like what?
Fruits and vases, we used oil paints this time.
That sounds like a lot of fun!
The art class yesterday was so much fun, it was my first time going!
That's amazing, I'm glad you had fun!
Me too, I was super nervous going in.
That's normal! So did you paint anything?
We used some oil paints on some fruits and vases, I was expecting a canvas personally.
I guess it's cheaper to paint fruit than a canvas.
It came in today! It finally arrived!
What did?
The letter! The letter from Brown!
The admission letter from Brown University?
Yes! I am so nervous, I can't open it. Will you come over and open it for me?
I got rejected by Brown. I'm not sure I am smart enough to read their letter. Just kidding. I'll be right there!
I just received an admission letter from one of the colleges I applied for.
Have you opened it?
Not yet. I'm too nervous to read it.
Just open it and find out what it said.
I got in.
I'm so happy for you.
Hey, I have some great news to report today!
You seem cheerful. I'm all ears. What happened?
I applied for admission at a state university and just received an acceptance letter.
That's wonderful. You've worked really hard on your academics and it's paid off.
I'm happy that my efforts have been rewarded. Now I can continue my studies at a reputable higher education institution like this one.
I'm happy you're doing well. I still haven't received an acceptance letter.
I went to that party.
I had no idea you were even planning on going.
I had some new dance moves I wanted to show off to all the kids.
How did they like it?
I was a big hit. Everybody love it.
You have to teach me how to dance so I can go next time.
The kids seemed to love my dance moves at that party.
You were the star. The kids were talking about it even afterwards.
I just want to show them what a real dancer looks like.
Now, don't go and get a big head about this.
I was a big hit at the party last night.
The kids party right?
Yup. I showed them my dance moves and won them over.
You should give me some lessons.
I went to my friends child's birthday party last night. There were so many kids there!
Did you have a good time?
Yeah, actually I did! I showed the kids some of my breakdancing moves! They loved it!
You do have some good moves! Sounds like fun!
It was! Until the cake I ate almost came back up.
Too much dancing, huh?
I think the kids had a good time at the party.
What fun things did they do.
We danced, I showed them my moves.
Did you do the flip thing?
Yes, I did the flip thing.
The flip thing is your best dance move.
I gave Jan some tips on how to give the presentation.
What kind of tips did you give?
The clients were Spanish. I told her if she spoke and used some of my language, it would impress them.
That was good of you to help her some new clients.
She is new, she has what it takes, just needed a little help.
Jan did a great job in the presentation yesterday!
I heard it went really well.
She was well versed in the presentation, she also used a lot of my vocabulary when presenting.
That makes sense, you did write all the documents she read through for the presentation
I just wasn't expecting her to use words I only say.
It must've been weird hearing how you talk.
Have you seen or heard from Kai?
No, why?
We were on a long hike and I just turned around and he's not there. I can't find him.
Oh no, did you call him?
I did but he didn't respond. I think his phone might be dead. He said the battery was low before we left.
I'll come out there and we can search the trail.
Myself and Kai got separated on our hike over the weekend.
That's terrifying! I hope you both found each other!
Don't worry, we found each other before it got dark!
Oh thank god for that!
I don't know how it happened. One moment we were walking along chatting, then I was all alone.
No point on dwelling on it, you're both safe and sound!
I thought I was never going to get out of that airport.
Sorry I couldn't pick you up myself, but I was preoccupied. How did you end up getting home?
I found the car rental place and just rented a car for myself.
There's also a bus that takes you out of the airport and into the city.
Hey, why didn't you pick me up from the airport yesterday?
I'm so sorry! My mom had a stroke and I had to rush her to the hospital.
Oh, that's terrible. I'm so sorry. I understand why you couldn't make it.
How did you end up getting home?
Eventually I found a car rental place right next door and rented a sedan.
I'm glad you found an alternative to get home.
It was a mission getting home from the airport yesterday!
I'm not surprised, it's always super busy there!.
In the end I just rented a car from the rental place next door.
Smart, saves you having to get a bus or taxi.
There is a part of the race I love.
I know you love marathons.
It comes at the point when I am almost out of breath and winded.
How far into the race is that?
It comes when I am within sight, and not too far off from, the finish line.
I know that feeling.
Did you see me at the race?
Yeah, you looked look you were going to collapse! Glad you finished though. Did you do good relative to other races?
Yes, I really pushed myself. It was such a rush crossing the finish line. I felt my lungs collapsing!
You should really learn to pace yourself and be more careful. People have died of heart attacks while pushing themselves on those races!
I'll keep that in mind!
Well, our family made it out of the china shop in one piece.
That surprises me since I know your son Kendall has broken some items in shops before.
I know, he has a real knack for touching expensive merchandise and then breaking it.
What did you do this time to keep him from touching everything?
I kept Kendall's hands at his sides the whole time.
That's a smart parenting trick.
My son almost broke an expensive piece of merchandise the other day.
Did he really, what did you about it.
I told him to keep his hands by his sides.
Children are just not careful.
I agree, my son is reckless.
As are all eight year old kids. .
I had to restrict Kendall to prevent him from touching the items.
Are the items delicate?
I don't know, but I don't want to take chances given how expensive the merchandise is.
What were you looking for in the shop?
I had to put Lee's SPF 15 sunscreen on his face when we were at the beach
He really hates that stuff.
Yeah, but it stops him getting sunburn so it's a lot better.
Hopefully he appreciates it.
I had to put more sunscreen on Lee's face a bit ago.
It's so crazy how red he gets without it.
I know! I always worry about skin cancer too.
Me too. The percentage of people who get skin cancer is really high.
Yeah, my sister had to get a mole removed last year.
That's good she caught it. That makes me want to start wearing extra sunscreen.
I'm so glad the judge didn't make me go to jail.
You're not the type of person that would like jail very much.
Yeah, I'm more of an introvert and I don't get along with new people.
You should try and be more outgoing so you can get over being shy.
I might try it I guess.
I think I want to ask out Cameron's sister.
I thought she was a senior in high school. Senior's don't date sophomores.
I know, but I was talking to her after school today, and we had a great conversation.
That doesn't mean she's willing to date you.
When I told her I thought she was pretty, though, her eyes lit up.
I suppose that's a promising sign.
I told some lies about Taylor that I am not proud of.
At least you can admit it.  What did you do?
I told people Taylor was cheating on her boyfriend, even though I know that isn't true.
Why did you do that? That just causes trouble.
I know. That's probably why I wanted to spread rumors. I know I am a horrible person.
No you are not. Just don't go around hurting your friends by making up lies.
Hey, did I tell you about Taylor and the donkey?
Man, cut that crap out. Everyone at school has been talking and we know what you're up to.
What? No, honest. I caught them out behind old man Johnson's barn.
First, what were you doing out behind old man Johnson's barn, and second -- no you didn't! Stop being so jealous because Taylor is dating Jenna.
The dude doesn't deserve her, man.
Neither do you if you're going to act like this.
I know I'm wrong for spreading false rumors.
So why did you do it in the first place?
Honestly, I have no idea why I did it.
You should apologize to Taylor as soon as you can!
I might or I might not, I'll see.
You are in the wrong here, you need to explain yourself!
I got an appeal from Robin today. I was surprised to get one.
What did you do with it?
I granted a hearing but I don't think he'll win.
That's too bad. I thought he was robbed with that verdict.
I don't know how to think of it.
Robin thinks the decision on her case was unfair.
I see.
I'm going to give her a hearing.
That is kind of you.
It's the right thing to do.
You are a good person for doing that.
I just had to fight my way out that cage, Cameron had me in there all week!!
Why was he holding you in a cage?
I have no idea, but now he is going to jail for a long time
He should get some serious time for this.
I'm throwing a party this weekend at home.
Can I come?
Absolutely. My parents won't be home.
When's the party?
It will be this weekend. You can bring a friend
I certainly will. I look forward to it.
I had a party at my house this weekend. My parents were gone. I invited a few of my friends but they brought their friends so the house was packed.
Where did your parents go?
They went out of town for the weekend for their friend's wedding.
How nice. Did you tell them about the party?
I haven't yet. One of the vases broke so I will have to explain that to them. I haven't decided if I am going lie to them.
Do you think they'll get mad at you?
I went to my first baseball game yesterday.
Did you have fun at the game?
I really enjoyed it! You should come with us next time.
Just let me know when!
I had so much fun at the game. Its nice to see baseball come back.
I know but the social distancing at the beer tent was crazy.
I know but I love these New York Yankees masks they were giving away.
I did not like that we could not keep the foul balls due to potential contamination.
I loved the hot dogs and cracker jack. Missed baseball. Plus they won!!
I hated sitting six seats away from you. Felt like a lonely loser.
Did I tell you where I went yesterday?
No, I missed your call and it was late by the time I got back.
I got to go to the first baseball game of the season and I really enjoyed the game.
Have you ever been to a baseball game before?
I have, but never the season opener! So that was an experience.
Well I am glad that you enjoyed your time.
I think being forgetful is taking a toll on others.
Did you annoy somebody?
I was going somewhere with Sydney and I kept asking for directions.
Is that a big deal?
I guess so, Sydney got mad and wouldn't give me the directions anymore.
Maybe you should get a GPS.
How did you like my new drama?
I loved it! I'm into all those historical dramas. You did such a good job.
What did you like most about my movie?
You were tough and believable as a judge condemning a murderer to death. I can't believe he died by the sword.
That's how they were executed back then.
It was such a good movie. You deserve an Oscar.
I played a magistrate in the historical drama who condemned a murderer and commanded him to die by the sword.
You look good in a period piece.
My voice coached helped me perfect my British for months.
You played a British magistrate?
The story took place in Britain in the 1900s.  It's quite fascinating.
Is it out on cable or in theatre's?
I have strange friends. One of them told me he had a dream that he was watching a historical drama in which I was a magistrate.
That's a weird dream to have.
I know! Then I was condemning a murderer and saying he will die by the sword.
What the heck makes someone dream about you like that?
He must think I'm a vicious wannabe ruler. I think it's funny, though.
It is funny but really strange.
There is a Las Vegas table that is really risky.
Betting your entire life savings isn't really a smart idea anywhere let alone on a risky table.
It really isn't but you have got to play to win.
That is so true!
This is a fun trip though, I am getting great at roulette.
I most certainly agree.
The trip to Vegas paid off!
Your husband is still going to have a fit when he finds out we went to Vegas instead of your mom's.
The roulette table paid off. He would have been more upset if he knew I risked all of his savings on a roulette table.
You should just tell him the truth about where the money came from.
I am so happy with my new job. I feel like such a success.
That's awesome Jordan! Does it pay well?
Very well. I am always able to pay my bills and have some left over.
That's great to hear! I wish I had a job like that.
I really love my new job.
Is it paying more than your last?
It sure is, it is nice not having to worry about if I can pay my bills each month.
That must be really nice.
I get to work with animals now and it is a dream come true.
I am envious of you.
I almost had that ice cube go down my windpipe.
You should try and be more careful so you don't get hurt.
Maybe Taylor and I should go back to playing basketball.
You two could try and work on your three pointers so you can be ready for the game this weekend.
That sounds like a great idea.
Don't ever try to catch ice thrown at your mouth!
I sense a story here. Am I right?
You are correct. Taylor and I were having an ice cube catching contest last night. It started when I threw a cube into the air and catch it. Taylor insisted on trying it too.  Well, we decided it was not chal Well, we decided it was not challenging enough to catch the cube thrown by oneself.  Instead, we decided to catch cube thrown by each other. Taking turns, Taylor would try to catch an ice cube I threw, and I would try to catch a cube Taylor threw.
Sounds like fun! What's the problem?
Taylor can throw a 96 mph fastball, and when angry, can propel an ice cube at the speed of light. Ironically, one of Taylor's lightening bolts caused a dark hole in my dentures. I now have one less tooth in my mouth.
Nice. Just in time for senior pictures too! I get your point!
Hey, what's up?
Hey Cameron, nothing much, you tell me how is it going?
It is going great, you know that day me and Taylor were tossing up the ice cubes and trying to catch them with mouth?
I remember, did you catch any?
Yes, I caught one.
Cool!
I hope my family will enjoy the play.
I am sure they will, they are so excited to see you act.
Thank you I am a bit nervous.
You will do great you are a great actor.
Wish me luck or better yet wish me to break a leg.
Break a leg you have this.
I brought my family to watch my plays at school. They were so excited to see me act.
Have they been to your plays before?
My mom hasn't missed a single one. She was the one who got me into acting.
She's such a supportive mom.
My mom is my biggest cheerleader. I love her so much.
You two are so tight.
I looked out in the front row and I saw my entire family was in attendance.
Wow, how did that make you feel?
To be honest, they were all so excited, it was actually kind of nice.
Good for you! I still can't get my dad to show up to my plays.
I'm sorry man. He's usually busy with work right?
Yeah, but your family was able to make time for you.
I'm glad I finally got to bring my family to watch me perform.
I'm sure they enjoyed it because you're very talented.
They gave me great reviews, but they are family.
I'm not, I'm telling you you're great.
Thank you, that is very kind of you.
I tell it like it is my friend.
I noticed a rip in the front of Jan's dress.
Oh no, what happened?
I'm not sure, I think she got it caught on something.
Was it ripped anywhere else?
I had a look behind her to see, but it didn't look like there were any more rips.
A funny thing happened with Jan's clothes.
Was it a wardrobe malfunction?
Yes, there was a rip in front. I looked behind to see if it continued on back.
Was the back okay, then?
There was a rip in the back too. Jan had to tie a shirt around her waist to cover everything up.
At least the clothes didn't fall off completely.
I was able to pay Sasha back for all that free cable.
No wonder you're always hanging out there.
Yeah, I go there just to watch TV and hang out. But I paid her bill this month.
Has Sasha fallen on hard times?
She lost her job recently and unemployment has not sent in the checks yet.
Tell her to keep applying for new jobs.
I'm throwing a surprise party.
That is such a great idea.
The boss hates surprises.
That's why it's such a great surprise.
It's going to be funny.
I'll bring the camcorder.
I'm so excited about the surprise party. I sent an email to everyone and they mostly seemed to be looking forward to it.
That's awesome! Do you have any of the details planned out?
Well, I'm going to ask people to bring some of his favourite foods. I know he loves brownies and potato salad.
Not to toot my own horn but I make killer brownies. I'll bring some in if you want.
Thanks, that'll be great! We're also all going to write a sentence about him on a big poster and read it out loud.
That's a great idea. I hope people only say nice things.
Did I tell you about the party Tracy and I went to?
When was it?
Over the weekend we went and had fun with the gang
What did you do at the party?
We had a blast playing ping pong and having some drinks.
Next time invite me please.
I'm exhausted from last night.
Why are you so tired? Did you have a busy week at work?
No, I went to a party last night with Tracy and the rest of my friends.
How was the party?
It was fun. I'm glad Tracy got to meet my friends since she had a great time with them.
It's good to hear they all got along so well.
I'm glad Tracy came to the party.
I heard she had a great time with your friends.
My crew loves to party.
It sounded like it was a lot of fun. Hopefully we can all get together again soon.
I'd like that.
I would too.
Tracy came over and met my friends at a party last night.
Which friends did she meet?
She met John, little John, Andre and Carl.
Did you guys all have a good time?
Yeah we all love parties and had a great time!
That's great!
Tracy came to the party last night.
Did she have a great time?
Tracy had a blast with the crew.
If she did not drink too much, she might remember all their names.
They all connected on Facebook just in case.
Tracy seems to get along with everyone.
Do you remember me Robin?
Didn't you go to high school together?
We did, we were in the same classes and sometimes we ate lunch together.
Did you meet up with her again?
Yes, she helped me study for an upcoming exam.
That was nice of her!
Robin really helped me a lot with studying for my test.
I'm glad she helped you too, you need to get an A or you are going to fail the class.
Don't remind me I am so scared.
Well if we study for 3 more hours and I think you will ace that test.
I hope so.
Robin helped me with school work.
That's nice of her, what school work were you doing?
We were studying for a test.
Did you guys manage to study much?
Yes, we studied for a few hours and covered all of the material we had.
Well good luck with your test.
I almost got hurt bad yesterday?
How?
I was chasing a ball in the street and barely avoided being hit by a truck.
Oh man that is scary.
Yes my heart was beating fast.
I bet!
I was playing a ball game with my son yesterday. It was fun except for one thing.
Did you lose?
No, well, yes I did, but that's not what I'm referring to!
Ok so what happened then?
My son hit the ball and it went into the street. I almost got hit by a truck chasing it down!
Well I'm glad you're ok! Next time wait for the street to be clear first!
Making balloon animals is harder than I thought it would be!
Well, I'm sure being a clown overall isn't a walk in the park.
I have some balloons I've been practicing with, I managed to make a snake and a worm so far.
Doesn't sound like you're making a whole lot of progress!
Give me time and I'll be able to make a dog, you wait and see.
Yeah, a hot dog!
I'm going to try and make a dog with this one.
Just twist it close to the end and you can make the neck.
This is a lot easier than I thought it was going to be.
Just make sure you practice a little bit each day and you will have it down in no time.
I hope so. I would love to start making money again.
I need to do acts that a clown does.
That should be easy. I am sure you can do that well.
I heard balloon animals will have to be done also.
You need to buy balloons to practice on.
Can you teach me how?
We can both learn it.
I was so hungry yesterday but was so busy to go out.
So what did you do?
I looked in the refrigerator and found some of Bailey's food.
So did you eat it?
Yes, I know Bailey would not mind.
I'm sure it's OK with him.
Bailey is going to scream when she notices that I ate her food.
Why didn't you eat your own food?
I didn't have anything to eat.
You always have food. Why didn't you have any food?
Because I didn't have time to do grocery shopping.
You'll have to find time. You can't just eat Bailey's food because it's there.
I hope Bailey doesn't notice that I ate all the food she had in the fridge.
Bailey just went to the grocery store! Why would you do that?
I got really hungry and wasn't paying attention to portions.
I don't know how you eat so much without bursting, but we better figure out a way to restock Bailey's refrigerator before she gets home and sees what you did.
Dude, I finally beat my dad today playing ball.
He probably just let you win.
No way, I've been practicing my layups and three pointers, it was legit.
Really, he must have been so mad, he thinks he's still playing for his college team.
Yeah, he does, but I am going to school in the fall on a basketball scholarship, he shouldn't be surprised.
Well, I guess all those hours practicing finally paid off, good job!
Wow, I never had sweat like this before!!
What were you doing, dude?
I had a one on one basketball game with my dad.
How did you do? I know he always beats you.
I won for the first time ever.
See, I told you those tips I gave you work wonders.
I finally beat my dad in basketball!
He's very good, how did you beat him?
I've been practicing day and night and it finally payed off.
That just goes to show you, hard work pays off.
I'm going to keep practicing so maybe I can beat him again!
You know what they say, practice makes perfect!
You wouldn't believe where I just got back from.
Where?
Tokyo! It was amazing. The fashion, the cities, and the sushi, oh my gosh.
That sounds great, but wasn't it hard not knowing Japanese?
No silly, what do you think I've been studying all day and night for the past year? I can speak it like a pro.
Wow, I can't believe you're such a fast learner.
I can finally eat a lot of sushi now!
Why?
I studied and learned the Japanese language.
When do you plan on eating a lot of sushi?
This week end. I will fly to japan and eat sushi.
Can I come? I also want to eat those things!
I think I'm doing pretty well on learning how to speak Japanese.
You have really picked it up pretty well since the last time I saw you.
I have been putting in extra hours to learn it so I don't get embarrassed when I speak it.
I'm sure you will do well since you have been studying so hard.
I really hope so.
I am so excited about my trip to Tokyo.
I bet! I can't believe you learned Japanese!
I'm becoming pretty fluent. It will make it easier to order at restaurants.
I know you really love sushi and how much more authentic can you get than Japan.
Yes! I want to try all the different kinds of sushi.
I wish I could go with you. I don't like sushi, but I've never been to Tokyo before.
I'm getting really hungry, how about you?
Yes same, should we stop somewhere to eat soon?
No I made sandwiches, in the back here. What would you like; roast beef or turkey?
Oh great. I'll take roast beef.
Hey, I am thinking about making something for lunch so that we don't have to stop.
That's a good idea. What are you making?
I can make us some sandwiches.
Nice. Can you make me a peanut butter and jelly?
Sure, I'll make a couple extra to be safe.
Sweet! Thanks a lot.
I made sandwiches and put them in the cooler for the road trip.
Awesome. That way we won't have to stop someplace to eat.
That's what I was thinking. We don't have to go to spend money at a restaurant
What kind of sandwiches did you make?
I used the Asiago Focaccia and made turkey with veggie sandwiches.
Those are going to be really good.
Did you know that Sasha can't speak English?
Really? Then how do you two communicate?
Lucky enough for me I am bilingual.
Oh! So you can speak her language?
Yes I can, she speaks Spanish and so do I.
I can only speak English.
I thought Sasha was aloof.
Yeah, she's very quiet.
But it's beacsue she only speaks Spanish.
Do you speak Spanish?
Yes, so I was able to talk to Sasha.
It's good that Sasha can talk to someone now.
I had to be Sasha's translator. I speak Spanish and English.
You are a great friend.
I will also teach Sasha some English.
Teach her to order food and how to understand cashiers at the grocery store, then she will be able to have some independence.
That's a good idea, I will speak with her later.
Good luck.
I had a nice conversation with Sasha the other day.
Is Sasha that new exchange student?
She is, she's actually really pleasant, I liked her a lot.
Wait, does she speak English?
No, she has yet to learn our language, we had a conversation in Spanish.
I didn't know you spoke Spanish.
Casey sprained her ankle. So, I helped her into the house.
Did you guide her walking?
I guided her walking to the couch.
She needed to elevate her legs.
I took Casey's red shoes off one at a time and helped prop her legs on the couch.
She also needs an ice pack.
I needed to help Casey take off her shoes one at a time last night.
What was wrong with Casey?
She was exhausted after work.
Was it a busy day for her?
Yes, it must've been very busy.
I'm glad you were able to help her relax afterwards.
Austin told me that he is so excited for my arrival that he couldn't sleep last night?
Is Austin picking you up at the airport?
I think I will take a taxi to his place since I get to town during rush hour.
You two will probably stay up all night talking.
You are right. I haven't seen him in 4 years.
Well you'll have plenty of time to catch up this week.
Do you think Austin is excited about me visiting?
He is, he wasn't able to sleep last night. He has so much stuff that he want to show you around the town!
Me too, but I was at least able to get to sleep!
Very funny, Remy!
When we get to shore, go ahead and take the cooler, blankets, and beach bag onto the beach and I will meet you on the beach.
Why, what are you going to be doing? Can't you help take some of the stuff off the boat?
I have to tie and secure the boat to the dock on the shore when we get there, unless you want to do it and I can take everything to a spot on the beach?
No, that's okay. You're better at the different knots and securing the boat than me. If it was me, the knot may not be secure enough and the boat would float away.
Okay we're here. Go ahead and get off first and I'll hand you everything from the boat. Then I'll get out and tie and secure the boat, just pick a spot close where I can easily find you.
No problem, see you on the beach in a minute! Make sure the boat can't float away from us!
I just came back from my boat trip.
Where did you go?
I just went around the coast, then I came back.
Are you over at the pier?
No, I came back at the shore, but I tied up the boat properly and securely.
I heard the shore can be dicey.
I had to secure the boat today for the storm.
How do you do that to make sure it doesn't float away?
It's just about making sure it's tied up properly. There is a way to do it so it's secure with some give.
Oh so that it can move a bit with the waves?
Yes, and still not float away or get battered.
Boating is an interesting hobby.
I really need to tie down this know so that this boat wont float away.
Do you know how to tie a sailor's knot?
I think my dad showed me when I was younger.
I can do it for you if you Ash, don't mind?
That would be amazing thank you very much.
I felt for Jan. he was literally dying of thirst'
Why did he not get water?
He was so sick, I had to fill his mouth with water.
Thanks for being so caring.
That was a long and arduous run.
Jan was about to fall out on us.
I know, I had to quickly give her water or else we would've had to rush her to the ER.
Next time we go running we have got to leave earlier.
It's just too hot right now to be running after a certain time.
We can do it at night next time.
All the children in my soccer class did a great job today.
Did you run them through some tests?
Yes, today I tested them all on how well the can kick a goal.
That is a good test!
We had a little test at my soccer class today.
What kind of test?
We saw who can kick a goal the best!
Wow, that sounds like fun!
The students are performing very well!
Those children performed very well.
I can see some improvements.
Yeah, I taught them in the soccer class how to kick a goal.
Hmm, and they nearly scored all their shots.
Yeah, they are very fast learners.
And you are also a good teacher!
I am very tired. I have been packing stuff all day.
Are you moving?
I was just helping my neighbour prepare to move to the new house.
I wish I had a neighbour like you.
I am getting rid of Sal and Hal.
That's a relief.
I offered to help them pack.
That will speed things up.
It is a way to prepare for their big move to the new house.
I say good riddance to both of them.
I helped my neighbours pack.
Were they moving somewhere?
Yes, their moving to a big new house!
I am sure they were glad you helped them move into their new house.
It was no problem at all really.
I offered to help my roommate with his packing.
Was it a big move?
Yes, I told them to just leave the preparation and packing to me.
What would they do without you?
I really wasn't bothered.
You are an angel.
My wife is going to kill me.
What makes you think that?
I have to work late again today.
How many days did you work late this week?
I stayed late everyday this week.
Yeah, she won't be happy.
I just called my wife to let her know I'll be home late.
Is everything okay?
Yes, business picked up today and we needed to complete an order.
Well, I'm really happy your business is booming.
I'm just very sorry I have to work more hours than usual.
It's okay I am sure your wife will understand.
We've been really busy lately at my job.
Better to be too busy than not busy enough, is what I always say.
Yeah, I'm having to work more hours than normal. It's stressful, but I'm trying to stay positive.
You're lucky. My job has been reducing our hours because we're losing customers.
This cropper job is hard work, but I really could use the money.
Are you up to date on all your bills?
Not really. I was late on my rent payment last month.
Could I offer to lend you some money?
I appreciate it, but I think I will make enough with this new cropper job for now.
Okay, but just let me know if you change your mind.
I'm so broke. I can't even afford gas this week.
Come work with me! I make great money at the local farm.
What would I have to do?
You'd be working as a cropper. It's super easy. Anyone can do it!
That sounds great! When can I start?
I will pick you up tomorrow at 8am.
I really needed money.
What should I do now?
Go work with me on a farm.
Is it good money for you?
Yea it's decent but I can't guarantee anything.
Sorry friend you are going to be okay.
So I finally got a job.
Tell me more about it.
It's as a cropper on a farm nearby.
Sounds like really hard work.
It is, but I'm desperate for income.
Hang in there, things will get better.
Today I wrote an unusual ticket.
What's an unusual ticket for a meter maid?
It was for a Maybach, I've never ticketed a car like that before.
That is an expensive car, what'd the driver do wrong?
They parked across three spots, diagonally, didn't pay any meters and had a dumped all pile of fast food containers just outside the passenger door.
Sounds like justification to write them several tickets.
I sent my portfolio to an internationally recognized agency.
Did you have some new professional shots done?
Yes, I put those in as well as the work I've done locally.
How long ago did you send your portfolio?
About a week ago.
Let me know when you hear back from them and good luck!
You know I am going to try to become a model.
Model what? You don't exactly have a model body.
My agent states I have exactly the body for their new line of products.
Is the new line of product for short and stocky folks?
That is downright mean of you!
Hey, I'm just looking out for you.
So I went and had some head shots done last week and the photographer told me I was a natural.
That's fantastic, great to get a compliment before you even get any work!
It made me think, maybe I could be a model for a big agency instead of this print work I'm doing!
I think you would be perfect, you should check that out!
Already did! I walked into an agency and presented my photos and I got a job!
Fantastic! That is an internationally recognized agency, you can work anywhere now!
Bryan really appreciated the birthday party I threw for him.
That was such a fun party and the catering was amazing.
Yeah, I really went the extra mile to try to make it special for Bryan.
Well, he only turns 40 once!
He made me breakfast in bed the next morning to thank me.
That was a thoughtful gesture.
There was a lot of effort put into this
There sure was. I don't like how we went underappreciated at first.
Of course. There was a lot of things that I needed to recognize you for. You did such a great job being you.
You're right. There is a lot of work to be done here but thanks for your kind words.
Any time! I think that you are a great person at the end of the day.
Thanks.
Jan cooked for me and the food looked amazing, it was my favourite meal.
You worked so hard to get your promotion you definitely earned it.
I'm just scared to move out of the state and travel.
Well I am sure the money all makes it worth it in the end.
When you put it that way it makes sense.
I got off easy with that accident. He just gave me a warning.
You are lucky he still let's you drive the car.
I know he is too nice, but what can I do?
You are horrible. Stop taking advantage of him.
He loves me secretly I can't help that.
How could my friend do that to my car?
What did they do?
They did donuts in the car park, with my car!
That's awful, was there any damage?
Yes, it needed new tires, they were all worn out.
You should make them pay.
My friend could have gotten someone killed driving recklessly like that!
They do not sound like a good driver.
If it happens again, I won't let them drive the car anymore.
They should promise this won't happen again.
I am so glad I camped in the forest last week.
I don't know how you do it, I hate camping!
Just being on a walk in the woods and watching the sunset until I can count the stars is so relaxing.
Did you feel more relaxed the next day?
I got up early to watch the sunrise and it was very peaceful listening to the birds.
I am glad that you had a chance to get away and enjoy nature because I know it's important to you.
I just got back from the woods.
Did you go camping?
Sort of, it was just one night.
Why did you go for only one night?
I just wanted to spend some time with nature.
That's good for clearing the mind.
I'm really going to help Bailey as much as I can.
What kind of case are you working on with her?
She signed a business deal with some others but she was cheated from some of the revenue.
Do you think she has a case?
I do. I think we can win this in court.
I'm sure she really appreciates you being her lawyer.
I am stuck in the field and can't get a hold of my mom to tell her not to make me dinner
Just have Casey walk over and give your mom the message.
Great idea. I will call her now.
Let me know if you can't find her and I will go over and give your mom the message.
No thanks. I don't want to owe you any more favours!
Actually, I am hoping your mom would invite me to stay for dinner, so no favour expected!
I went to visit my brother the other day.
Is he well?
Yeah, he keeps asking me why the family won't come.
Oh that's sad, I hope you explained to him what was going on.
I did, and he cried, I feel bad for him.
Me too.
Kendall and I had to do this group project on the Civil War.
How did that go? I know sometimes she procrastinates.
She actually was really helpful as long as I took the lead and kept her on task.
I am glad it worked out well for you then. How did you keep her on task?
I just went through each question until we got to the last one and I told her we were done now.
That's not a bad strategy for someone that struggles to stay on task!
Kendall and I worked really hard on our school project.
Tell me more about the project.
We did a science experience. We had to research answers to 10 questions about science and matter.
You should have done extensive research.
Kendall and I did a lot of research to answer the questions. After the last question, we were finally done.
I'm happy that you finished. I hope that you and Kendall get a good grade.
I told Kendall we were done when we got to the last question.
What were you guys working on?
It was our assignment for math class?
Are you in the same class at Kendall?
No, she wanted me to help her with her homework.
You are so good in math.
My kid is awful.
What did he do now?
I took them both to the beach and when we got there I went for drinks.
So, what happened.
The little one buried my keys in the sand.
I hope you brought a metal detector with you.
I had a tough day at the beach.
What do you mean? The weather was perfect.
Well, my kids buried my keys in the sand!
Yikes, how long did it take you to find them?
About 1 hour! It was torture.
On the bright side, now you have a funny story to tell.
My kids buried my keys in the sand today.
In their sandbox in the backyard?
No we had a family day at the beach. It took hours to find the keys.
They didn't know where they buried them?
They didn't, so we had to just go over all the spots where they were.
Well at least you did find them.
I can't believe that little monster hid my keys in the sand!
Now, Carson, he was just trying to play a game.
Yeah, right. We searched for over an hour before we found them.
You have to admit, it was kind of funny right?
Well, once we found the keys it was sort of funny. What if we hadn't found them?
I guess I would have had to given you guys a ride back home to get your spare keys.
I have been helping Kai out lately.
Has Kai been having a rough time?
Yes, he lost his apartment after he got fired from his job so I set him up with a new job and a new apartment.
Wow, I hope Kai was appreciative that's a lot of work for you.
He was, I just wanted to see him doing better.
I am sure he is now.
I hope Kai is happy with the job and apartment I got him.
Yes of course, you made him so happy.
The only thing I asked of him is that he does not waste this opportunity.
I am sure he will try his hardest to live up to his potential.
I want Kai to succeed and to do that he needs to be strong.
I hope he will do everything in his power to make this worth it.
I think is time for me to get a new car. What do you think?
What's wrong with your car?
It's very old now, and I need a new upgrade.
Cool, let me know if you need any help.
Yes, I already saved up for a down payment. Now I just need to figure out what car to buy.
I will help you find the car of your interest.
I have been working overtime for the past month just to save up some money.
Oh yeah, what are you going to do with all that saved money?
I plan to buy a new car with it.
That sounds excellent, what kind of car?
I am thinking of a hybrid SUV for my biking trips.
That is so awesome that you are working so hard towards your goal.
I needed a new car, so what did I do?
I don't know, steal one?
Very funny, I worked hard and saved money for a down payment.
What a novel idea.
O.K, wise guy; I don't see you with a new car.
You've got me there.
I accomplished a major goal yesterday!
Wait, did you finally buy you new car?
Yes I did!
That is great, I know you wanted this so badly!
Yes, I saved for a very long time, especially for the down payment.
I'm really happy for you, Sydney!
My car is giving me a lot of trouble.
Is it really, are you going to fix it?
No, I am saving money for a down payment for a new car.
Maybe you can sell your can and raise more money.
Yeah I was thinking about it but its a piece of trash.
I guess something is better than nothing you should post it.
Jan's mom was so touched by my gift. I'm so happy.
That's great. I thought the scarf turned out really great.
Thanks. It sure took a lot of time. But it was worth it.
A homemade present always has a special extra feel to it.
I think so, too. That's why I love doing it.
Well, I wouldn't mind something like that for my birthday. Just saying.
Kai and I had a great date.
What happened after the date, did Kai end up staying the night?
We got the food out of the car and he popped the trunk. He had his duffel bag.
So he did end up spending the night. Did he make you breakfast?
I loved every bit of the date.
That's lovely, did Kai have a good time too?
I think so, I was wondering if he was going to leave when I got home.
Did he?
I invited him in for a coffee.
That's good.
What do you think of the new car?
It's very roomy and spacious. I like it a lot.
The car was a birthday present.
That's some birthday present!
Look at what my parents bought me this years for my birthday.
Is that car yours.
Yes, it is.
Maybe you should pick me up so we can take it for a test drive.
I'm already at your door.
Ok. Ill be out in a minute.
I got a new car for my birthday.
Your mom bought you the one that you were wanting?
Yeah, the red mustang.
You going to pick us up and take us school.
I sure will, I took Amy this morning.
That way we don't have to take the bus and can get to school early.
I got a new car for my birthday!
Wow congrats. How do you like it?
I love it. Today I picked up my friend on the way to school and we drove with the top down.
That's awesome. What a way to arrive at school.
She loved it and is going to chip in for gas if I drive her regularly.
That's a good deal. You guys will have so much fun.
I was not in a relationship for a while.
It's time to find someone.
I think I found her already and I am ready to propose.
That is exciting!
I think she is the surprise of my life.
Good for you.
Guess what?! You are not going to believe this because you're my best friend and you know me so well.
Tell me now or I'll unfriend you on Facebook!
Well, as you know, I've been a longstanding member of the singles club and loved being single, but I am now in a relationship with just one guy!
Get out of here! Let me guess, the lucky guy is either Malcolm, George or Jake, am I right?
Wrong! Ding, ding, ding! It's Wayne! He kisses so good, I just had to make the commitment! We're very happy.
I am so glad for you!
Riley gave me a report importance of keeping the streets clean of trash.
That should be useful for your project.
Exactly I mostly got the other information online.
It's good that you have multiple sources of information for your project.
That's what I was thinking.
Sounds good! Good luck.
Riley let me borrow her report.
Did you find it interesting?
I did! What a great topic.
What was it about?
It's about the importance of cleaning the streets of trash.
I hope it helps your with your research.
It's important to clean the trash.
Okay, let's do the project on that then.
I did, I used the report Riley gave me, I think this is a game changer.
Good let's talk to the team.
Yes, let's call them now.
This will feature all of us.
My family is convinced that I would go to hell.
Why?
They said I have committed every sin.
This looks bad, are you afraid?
Not really.
Okay.
My family is worried about my soul going to hell.
I never got the impression they were that religious.
They're not until I commit what they see as sins.
Did what you did really qualify as wrongdoing?
Half of my sins really are wrong and the other half is merely religiously proscribed.
I hope you can patch things up with your folks.
I told Sasha to meet me at the pizza joint by school, but I never showed up.
Are you just a flake like now?
She's done that to me, so I thought I would get back at her.
I know it's a horrible feeling when you are waiting for someone and they don't show up or call.
When I confronted her, she acted like it's no big deal.
It probably is no big deal to her.
I think I wrote down the wrong directions for the place Sasha gave me.
I guess so since Sasha said you never showed up.
Why didn't she call me and ask me where I was?
Maybe she figured you were just running late and were going to show up.
I'm sorry about that, I should apologise to Sasha too.
I made another deposit for Alex last night.
Have you missed any yet?
Nope, I've made every single deposit for Alex since I started working for him.
I bet you guys have earned quite a bit of money.
We have! The deposits have done well in the stock market.
I'm jealous. Maybe I should start trading in the stock market.
Man Alex you rocks at this.
He does, we made a lot of money because of him.
He is a stock market genius.
He sure is.
Alex and I are killing it. Our money has tripled in a few weeks.
No way. I thought you put it in a savings account not the stock market.
No we took some risks and invested.
No way. That's so cool.
Just don't say anything. I don't want anyone else to know.
Oh okay, I won't tell anyone.
So Alex gave me the money that she wanted to invest and I handled everything for her.
Really? So you put her money into stocks?
Yes, I deposited the money into her brokerage account and I managed everything for her.
Did you make a lot of money for her?
Oh yeah. With her deposits and my knowledge and research, we made a killing together in the stock market.
Do you think you could manage an account for me and produce the same types of results?
You'll never guess what Alex had for me today.
What was it?
It was another deposit, I always deposit the money he brings me on the stock market.
In time these investments will grow.
Wow! All this money must have really built up over the last few months.
It definitely has, soon we will be wealthy.
I'm a little sad this morning.
Did you have a bad night sleep?
No, I called Skylar last night and asked her to the dance.
Oh, I guess she turned you down?
Yeah, but she was kind and gentle about it, so I'm not mad, just sad.
Skylar is a nice person, but I think she already had another date to the dance.
Hey, it looks like I got Cameron's towel by accident.
Why don't you give it back to him?
Well, the towels were handed out randomly. If I got Cameron's, Cameron probably got someone else's and he hasn't said anything about it.
Maybe just use Cameron's towel. It's just a towel. It's not a big deal.
You know I'm a GP in this small village?
Oh really, have you seen many patients lately?
Yes actually, a patient came in looking very sad recently.
What had happened to them?
They were going through a rough patch but I knew exactly what they needed to improve their mood.
That's great!
I just got finished updating my journal.
That's great that you keep up with that. I always say I'm going to but then don't follow through.
Well I like to write down all my ideas so I don't forget them later. So really it's more for that than just a diary.
Oh I see! And what idea did you write down today?
I can't tell you that. You might steal it and make a ton of money.
Darn, that's exactly what I wanted to do! Well, you can't blame a friend for trying.
Man, I got stuck with such a stupid task today.
Seems like you're always getting saddled with someone's chores. Learn how to say no!
I know, I know. But this time I left her wallet at home, and we needed the gift card in it. So I had to go back and get it.
Sounds like it was your fault this time! So why are you complaining?
She could've at least reminded me. She asked me to carry it in my bag, but it was so long ago and I forgot!
Got to leave yourself a note, my dude. Got to leave yourself a note.
I forgot to bring my friend their wallet.
Had they left it at yours or something?
Exactly that, I was already forgetting the keys when I ran inside and completely forgot to put the wallet in my bag.
What did you do?
I offered to pay for some of their food.
That's nice of you.
I ended up leaving my friends wallet at home. He asked me to put it in my bag.
You can't remember anything, they should have carried it themselves.
They didn't have any money to cover lunch, so I picked up the check.
That's nice.
I'm going to play Lee's army in the video game while he's at the bathroom.
Don't you think he's going to get mad?
I don't think he's going to care.
I think he will. He takes his video games seriously.
Well, if he's so good at video games, then he can fix the mistakes I make.
I don't think he's going to invite you for video games after this.
Taylor helped me go to sleep earlier.
Were you that tired?
I was, he put a pillow behind me so I could try to relax.
How nice of Taylor to do that.
After that I fell asleep.
It is nice to get some rest every now and then.
Taylor put the pillow behind my head so that I have something to rest on while I relax and take a nap.
He's so considerate.
Only with people he likes. He can be a jerk.
I've seen him be a jerk to this homeless person who asked for money.
That's the part I don't like about him. I think everyone should treat people with kindness all the time.
That's something we should live by.
I had such a difficult time trying to relax today.
Did you get any help?
Yeah. Taylor put a pillow behind me on the couch so I could relax and take a nap.
That's sweet. Did it work?
I slept for a few hours.
Actually, I might have to go to sleep soon too.
I found a good hotel right here on the first page.
How much does it cost for 2 days?
It says it's only 100 dollars for two days.
Wow, that is extremely cheap.
I'm going to book it right now for my trip with my friends.
Sounds like a great idea to me.
I've just viewed some nice hotel online.
Are you planning on taking a trip?
No. I am planning a trip for my friends. I want everything ready in advance.
You are a great friend to have.
Anything for my buddies, they mean the world to me.
When is the trip?
Whew, that could have gone worse.
Why'd you tell the officer we were sisters?
You know I have warrants, I didn't want to give them my real name.
So you used Jordan's name instead?
I panicked, I'm sorry!
Just don't do it again, pick a different alias next time.
My mom is always complaining that I am getting bad grades!
Why don't you study?
I like to play around and studying takes to long!
If you don't study your always going to get bad grades.
Your right Its just to boring.
If you don't your mom will keep complaining!
My mom is so upset with me because my grades are bad and she blames me because I never study.
Well maybe you should start putting a bit more effort into studying.
I probably could, but I just love to play around.
Hey I love to play around too, but if you keep getting bad grades your mom probably isn't going to let you play.
That is true. Maybe you are right.
I am just saying that it might be a good idea to put a bit more into school.
I had a nice therapy session in the hospital today!
Really? Are you feeling better?
Absolutely! My therapist today was Kendall, who I really like.
Great! How did it go?
Today's session involved Kendall stretching my legs. It felt so nice!
I bet! Hope you continue to improve!
Hey friend, How are you?
I am fine thank, you how are you Lee?
I am good too, I met Kendall at nursing home, he was helping a patient at the nursing home and he helped me in stretching my legs.
That's nice of him.
Yes, he is so kind.
True.
My knees feel really good after I was able to stretch them out with Kendall's help.
I hope so you have not moved for about three days.
I know, my back has been hurting me and I don't really feel like moving around that much.
That is ok, maybe we can try and get you some more physical therapy with Kendall later.
That would be great.
The kids are exhausted. They have been playing all day.
Sounds like they had a lot of fun.
Yes. I took them to the pizza parlor and arcade.
Kids love that place.
I am so glad the kids like to eat pizza and enjoyed the arcade.
Thanks for taking them to the arcade, I had some chores to do.
You are most certainly welcome.
They all look so tired from eating all that pizza and playing in the arcade.
Yeah there are certainly good games out there and stuff too.
I'm happy the kids had fun!
Wow it's hot out here!
It's summer time. Prime time for swimming in the ocean.
Oh! I hate beaches. Plus I've got sunburn.
It's time you face your fears.
Aren't you listening I said it to that old man and now to you; I don't want to go out to the ocean I've got sunburn.
Nonsense Lee. We're going!
I don't want to go to the beach.
You already told the old man.
I informed him that I might get sun burn.
He does not care about the sun burn.
I don't want to ruin my skin.
I understand how you feel.
I think they don't understand how quickly my skin burns.
Exactly not everyone can go to the ocean and just lay out there.
That's what I told him man and he didn't want to hear it.
It doesn't matter what he wants to hear just don't do it.
I'm not it's my body and I know it better than him
Exactly, stand your ground.
The trash compactor is broken.
What do you mean? Is it stuck?
My wife put too much hard items in the trash and the compactor broke trying to smash it.
Wow! What are you going to do about it?
I tried to fix it myself but it looks like I may have to call a handyman.
My brother-in-law is a great one. I'll give you his number.
How do you use this trash compactor again? I put the trash in it what's next?
Oh just press that button there.
It will flatten it all?
Yeah if for whatever reason you hear a grinding sound hit the emergency stop.
The big red one I'm guessing.
That's the one.
I just put the garbage in the trash compactor. I need to press the button to flatten the trash.
That's convenient  I wish I had that at my building.
It's pretty cool. This way the trash is nice and compact and takes up a lot less room.
It's what they do at the recycle centres.
That's right. Every time I take my cans and bottle to recycle, I watch them flatten them.
Otherwise it's just too much trash.
I can't believe how negligent my boss has been lately!
He seems very lazy and procrastinates all the time.
I had to take out his garbage because of the atrocious odour.
What couldn't he take out his own garbage?
He thinks that he's too high class and above taking out the trash.
I feel bad for you Tracy, he takes advantage of your kindness.
Sydney and I went shopping.
I see the packages on the steps.
When we got home I reminded Sydney of something that we forgot to buy when we were at the store.
Did she send you back to the store?
She threw me out of the house.
That is not a reasonable reaction.
I helped the patient lose 20 pounds!
Was it the diet or the exercise?
It was both actually.
You are amazing.
Yes, I feel like I could be a life coach.
Ok, lets not go that far.
I had a great day today. One of my patients followed my advice and lost several pounds, feeling overall more healthy!
That's great to hear! When are you going to give me some of that advice?
You didn't give me the impression that you needed that advice, but if you would like, I can give you some pointers!
Thanks, I would appreciate that. I've been feeling kind of sluggish lately and no matter how much I exercise, I can't seem to lose that last few pounds!
Have you tried intermittent fasting?
No, please tell me more!
My job is to help my clients get better by improving their diet, getting them to exercise more, and figuring out which herbal supplements they need to take.
How do you figure out the herbal supplements they should be taking?
I study their blood work for any irregularities.
That's very interesting.
It is, I have been interested in this stuff forever.
It sounds like a perfect job for you.
I just found out I like decorating my yard
How did you find this out?
I decorated my yard this morning and really enjoyed it.
Tell me more about it!
I used some rocks that I found and made a cool pattern in the grass.
Send me a picture, I'd like to see it!
I found rocks in the yard.
What are you going to use them for?
Probably art.
Like what?
A pattern in the grass.
That is creative man.
I was picking up rocks in the yard today before I mowed. There were tons of them.
Why do you have so many rocks in your yard?
I don't know but I took them and made a pattern on the grass.
What kind of pattern?
A peace sign. It looks pretty cool.
Take a pic and send it to me.
I found a lot of rocks in the yard.
Did you get rid of them?
No I decided to make a pattern in the grass.
Spicing up the yard a bit huh?
Yeah it looks nice, I might make a garden around it.
Great idea!
I punched Jan and shouldn't have.
Was this because of one of your arguments again?
Yes, but this argument was over whether Jan was quick enough to dodge a punch.
I guess you won that argument.
Jan kept arguing saying I didn't give him a heads up.
That seems like a frivolous objection.
I felt so bad for Bob today.
Did he fail a test?
No, he forgot his wallet and didn't have any money to buy lunch, we all saw him trying to find money in his pockets.
That must have sucked to go all day with out lunch.
Well, we had him come sit with us and we gave him some food, I gave him some French fries and someone else gave him half a sandwich.
That was very nice of you, I am sure he was really happy to have something for lunch.
Bob was just there while we ate our lunch. He didn't have enough money to buy something for himself.
That's sad.
He's totally broke. He lost his job and has to cut back on everything. I gave him some of my French fries.
Lots of people have lost their jobs.
It's hard times for everyone.
Yeah. Everyone has to find a way.
Bob had no money for lunch again. I had to share my fries.
Well, that was nice of you. What do you think is going on with him?
I think he has a lot going on. I get the feeling he's not getting enough hours at work.
Well, I hope he eventually finds something that's a little more reliable. I feel for him, though.
Yes, me too. I feel bad.
Well, looks like we'll just have to help him out till he gets back on his feet.
I felt bad for Bob, he didn't have anything to eat for lunch.
Yeah, things have been rough for him lately.
We should all try to do something nice for him and get him some food or something.
We should just collect some money from everyone in the shop and then give it to him so he can go food shopping.
That's a great idea let's tell everyone after we get back from lunch.
We can also bring in perishable items that we have at home.
My friend Alex told me I smelled really bad, is that true?
What smells bad?
Alex says I have bad breath and just general bad odour.
Have you been washing yourself lately?
Not like every day. I don't have access to a shower every day.
That's why. You just need a bath.
Can you believe my boss pulled me aside today and told me I smelled really bad?!
That's crazy, why would he say that?
Well maybe I do smell bad but I'm a garbage man so what do you expect?
Well you take a shower every day and wear deodorant don't you?
I take three showers a day, but it's not like I can stop in the middle of the day and take a shower on the garbage truck.
Just ignore him, who cares?
I didn't realize I smelled so badly until someone told me.
How did they tell you?
They pulled me to the side and told me I should take a shower and change my clothes.
Why did you smell?
I was working in the yard all morning.
I'm going to add the number to the list.
Why?
It's too long to remember.
Yes, that's true.
There's too many people.
Something must be wrong.
I couldn't remember each person so I had to think of another strategy.
How's that strategy working out for you?
It's okay but everyone's a number now and I don't know anyone's name.
Sounds like it's a good system for now but might not teach you anything in the long run.
I know. I may have to think of something else.
So I assign each person a number and call it once their order is ready.
Why don't you just call their name?
There are too many people. I can't remember all their names.
Business must be good.
It isn't bad.
If it isn't bad, it's good.
I don't have a very good memory.
How did you get them all in order then?
I have to write down the numbers, the line was so long.
It was a very long line.
To many people to remember so the numbers worked good.
Yeah, it looks like you got them all.
You know I've been camping lots of times.
I didn't know that.
Yes, I'm such a pro, they always have me make the campfire.
Alex, you're on fire!
Yikes, I was too close to the fire, throw some water on me.
Next time I'll make the campfire.
I can't believe how dumb I was acting. I caught myself on fire. I was just trying to impress them.
I know man but that was not the way to do it. You could have gotten killed.
I know I know, this won't happen again I have learned my lesson
Man I'm sorry but you need to be carful in the future.
I was trying to impress everyone.
Thanks but the fire is on you.
Ouch!
Get on the ground and roll.
That worked, thanks.
You are welcome.
Ouch, that burns
You shouldn't be playing with fire.
I just wanted to make a campfire for you my friends.
Don't worry, you shouldn't have to impress them.
I know, but I wanted to show them my skills.
I guess making a campfire is not one of them.
I was not expecting that to happen.
Why do your pants look burned?
Well, I was trying to impress everybody around the campfire last night.
Oh, no. Alex, what happened?
I accidentally caught myself on fire.
Yikes! At least you didn't burn yourself too badly.
Remy and I had a really scary moment yesterday.
What happened to you guys?
We were both rock climbing and I lost my grip and would have fallen had Remy not grabbed my hand at the last moment.
Are you both okay?
Yeah. Just a little shaken up about it.
I'm shaking just thinking about it.
Eureka, I finally figured out the solution to the math problem!
What caused the lightbulb moment?
I don't know. I just reconciled the answer on my own and the solution came to me.
Well, I guess it did take you forty minutes to solve.
Yeah, it was tough trying to figure out what I was doing wrong in my equations.
Now that your homework is done, we should go play.
Man, I am feeling much better now that I had an awakening.
What I find most impressive is that you did it by yourself. No counsellors or therapists.
I was just staring at the wall and working these solutions out in my head.
Did you write it all down to help you refer to in the future?
No need to. I discovered I just had anxiety over complex mathematical problems and I took it personal. I just used the unknown function to arrive at a general solution for all problems and it worked.
Really, but you will never use this stuff in your life. You work at a shoe store.
My sister's birthday is tomorrow.
Are you going to have a party?
No party, but I will bake her a strawberry cake.
Did you bake it yet?
Not yet, I just got back from the store with a few ingredients that I needed for the cake.
The cake sounds delicious, save me a slice.
My friend's birthday is tomorrow.
What are you going to do to celebrate?
I am baking a cake for her.
Did you make it yet?
Yes, I went to the store and got the ingredients to make it.
I love cake!
I have to bake a cake.
Who are you baking a cake for?
Chris, I need to go to the store though to get powdered sugar for the icing.
Well let's go. Let me get my keys
I have to make a cake to take to that potluck at work.
Why don't you just buy one of those pre-made ones?
Well because I want to try my hand at a homemade one, but I really am clueless.
I am sure you can find some recipe online that will work.
That is my plan. I am going to head to the store later and grab the ingredients and give it a go!
Let me know how it turns out! I am sure you will do a great job!
The house we built yesterday was impressive.
Why were you building a house?
I joined a volunteer group.
That sounds very fulfilling.
We help people in need, and the group leader said we're really talented.
It must be great to find a new skill.
The house I volunteered at yesterday is just a couple weeks from being finished.
Chris told me that you worked hard on the house, painting and doing whatever was asked of you.
Thank you for introducing me to the program.
It will look great on your application and you are helping someone be able to live in a home.
I'm so tired from volunteering work.
What kind of volunteer work did you do?
I helped build a house. I think we really did an excellent job.
I had no idea you knew how to build a house.
I don't. But the other guys who did most of the work were excellent.
It's the thought that counts I guess.
Today was the warmest day that we've been out there building but we had an excellent day.
I can't believe you are banging a hammer and building a house.
Volunteering is such an awesome feeling, especially when it's something as grand as a house.
How many people are out there helping?
There are at least 10 of us. You should come out.
When you all start working inside, I'll help out.
At first I wasn't sure what to do with the note.
I think you did the right thing because you cannot have that note floating around out there.
Exactly, that information was very sensitive and needed to be out of there.
There needs to be a meeting about sending these kind of notes from this point forward.
That's a great idea and I'm going to try to do that next week.
Set some guidelines as this is not something that you need to be taken care of daily.
I enjoyed so much having a delicious dinner at a fancy restaurant after a hard day at work.
Nice, who did you go with?
I invited all my employees.
Oh wow, that is really nice!
Yeah, I try to treat my employees when I can
You are a nice boss.
I wanted to thank all my employees for all their hard work on the project this month.
What did you do for them?
I took them to go to Ruth's Chris Steakhouse for dinner this week.
Oh, wow, that's an excellent restaurant!
Yes, I love it there too.
That sounds fun!
Alex is a caring man.
Why did you say so?
I've been crying, he swayed me back and forth in a rocking chair and put me to bed.
I wish my dad is like your dad.
He is the best.
Good for you.
Alex was up with Tracy all night, she just kept crying.
I think that little baby of yours has colic.
The only thing that seemed to help was when he rocked her in the chair and laid her of his chest. He got her to bed around 4am.
I can cover your shift tonight, if you need to rest.
Do you have any memories from when you were a baby?
Not really, I don't remember being a baby, how about you?
I remember when my dad Alex held me while rocking in a chair and then put me to bed, I was crying at first then calmed down.
That's very specific for a baby memory.
I almost had a falling out with my client.
What happened this time?
We disagreed about the order and she said some nasty things.
How did you react?
I was going to give her some choice words of my own but decided to keep the language in check.
That was a very diplomatic decision.
I just want to tell you off.
What did I do to you?
You won't give me back my mother's jewellery I lent you!
I lost it. I said I was sorry.
At least pay me for them. You are lucky I'm a lady. I have some not-so-nice names for person like you!
Maybe we can work out a payment plan.
I saw the new boss today.
Really? What is he like?
Rude. I tried to talk to him and he just ignored me.
What? I heard he was really nice.
Well, you heard wrong.
I saw the new boss in the lunchroom this morning.
How is he? Is he nice?
I don't know. I ignored him.
What do you mean you ignored him? He's your new boss!
I don't care. I don't like him.
Wow. Hope that doesn't come back to bite you later.
I think my new boss is a jerk.
I'm sure he didn't ignore you on purpose.
I gave him a hug and he didn't even look at me!
Wow, that's pretty bad.
I also changed the oil in his car!
Ok, maybe you're doing too much.
They deserved what I said to them!
Taylor, you were rude and condescending.
No, I just told them all what they needed to hear.
You spoke down to them and made them feel stupid.
If they felt stupid, that was their problem.
That's rude, you are being arrogant.
They couldn't decode what I meant.
How did you get your point across?
I put the phrase in another way and talked down to everyone so that they would feel stupid.
And it worked Taylor?
Yeah.
I'm not sure that's the best way to go about things.
I'm so sorry I ran over Alex's fingers do you think their is anything I can do?
You could go and get Alex some ice?
Good idea, I will be right back.
Try and hurry up Alex looks like he is in a lot of pain.
I will hurry up!
I think Alex is going to sue me in court.
Why would he sue you?
I accidentally ran over his fingers with my bike.
How did you do that?
I wasn't watching where I was going, but now he's seriously injured.
You're in a lot of trouble.
I am so sorry! I did not mean to run over Alex with my bike.
Did you call an ambulance?
No, I was afraid that they would charge so much money so I offered to drive him to the hospital instead.
You better have driven fast!
I wasn't even going that fast when I went over his hands, I didn't think it was that serious.
I heard that he was seriously injured as a result.
Kai asked me to tell Bailey that he thinks going out to dinner would be fun, but Bailey said she'd rather stay at home because she was tired.
Oh, and what did Kai say then?
He said that would be fine, but it would be less work to go out.
I see. Did she change her mind?
Yes, she ended up saying that it would be a great idea and they agreed to go out.
That's great, Carson.
This fight between Bailey and Kai is ridiculous.
What are they fighting about?
Some misunderstanding, but they want me to be their go between.
So you're communicating for them?
Yeah, Kai tells me what to tell Bailey then I bring Bailey's message to Kai.
That sounds tedious, you should tell them to make up.
Ash and I finally sat our parents down and told them we are in a relationship.
How did it go for you guys?
It went a bit better than we thought and they actually weren't angry with us.
That's great news! Did they seem happy?
No I wouldn't say happy, but they weren't angry either.
I suppose that is better than them being mad at you guys.
Look at this picture I found and hung up
When did you paint that, it looks... a little childish haha
That's cause I was a kid when I painted it!
How old were you?
I think maybe 6 or 7
That's pretty good for that age then!
Do you like that new painting I hung up?
The colors are pretty. Where is it from?
I was going through my old stuff in my parent's attic and found it. I painted it in third grade.
That's adorable. It really ties the room together with the color scheme.
Yeah, I thought so. And it has an abstract element to it so it is interesting.
It fits nicely. And it's a good conversation piece.
Oh my God, I can't believe I found this.
What is it, it looks like some sort of artwork.
It's a picture that I painted when I was in elementary school.
Well it kind of does look like something a little kid would paint.
Really? I mean it's from like almost fifteen years ago, I guess it would.
Girl, you are so sentimental and nostalgic.
This picture brings back a lot of memories.
Was that when you first realized your love for art?
I can’t really say, but I’m gonna guess it was around that time.
For someone that age there’s a lot of details in it.
Now that you say that, I see it.
We should hang this in the museum at the school.
I know I can figure this dang program out.
Is it that difficult?
Yeah, the layout is really weird. Maybe if I try this?
Woah yeah, that looks confusing.
Ah I got it, now I can finish my work in time.
Nice.
I am going crazy right now!
Why is that?
I feel snugged to death by everyone! I low key need to be alone.
Just rest and take a break. It's crazy how much pressure people put on you.
Yeah I need to chill out.
Let's only meet with one friend today.
I think I had a panic attack today.
Why? What happened?
I was on the bus and there were too many people around me.
So? What's wrong with that?
It gave me too much anxiety and felt like I was going crazy.
I'm sorry, that really sucks. I hope you're better now.
Will is so kind for letting me use the computer.
He is. Were you able to order what you needed off Amazon?
Yeah, the dolls for my friend's birthday will be here in 2 days. Will you keep them here at your house?
Be happy to. I will bring them over the morning of the party.
Tracy gave me a great evaluation today.
They evaluate students?
They do it each year so you know where to improve.
I am so glad yours was good.
Tracy is a great advisor. I did well because of her help.
You're lucky. Keep up the good work.
Man Tracy really helped me out.
How?
She gave me a great end of year evaluation.
That was nice of her.
Sure was.
I just got my evaluation for the end of the year and I was pleasantly surprised.
Really? What did it say?
It said that I was doing great in all areas! I thought I was not doing that well at all.
Your teacher must have thought differently.
I guess so! Tracy, my teacher is always really honest so I doubt she would have given me that evaluation if she didn't mean it.
Well I am glad it worked out for you.
I'm really struggling to come up with the money to pay my mortgage this month.
I was worried that would happen when you bought a house before you got a job.
I know, I know. Buying the house was a pretty bad decision, but I can't change it now.
Instead of worrying, why not ramp up your job search?
I guess I could work on my resume and check some job websites.
I'd be happy to look over your resume if you want a second opinion.
I thought that job was a sure thing, it is the only reason I bought that house.
The boss told me that he was going to give it to you, I had no idea.
How could you not know, your the vice president of the company.
Sorry, I told you not to buy it before I knew for sure. You just went ahead and done it.
You knew all along didn't you?
I'm not sure how smart it was to buy a house now.
Why not?
Well, I don't exactly have a job. Might not be the right timing.
I'm really sorry. I hope that it works out.
I'm sure that it will. I'll just have to get something.
Just believe in yourself and you will.
Man bills really are getting out of hand.
Well why did you get that house without a job?
I know, I'm dumb, it needs so much fixing up
You're not dumb. I can help with the fixing up at least
Thanks that would be great!
Well keep looking and take any job for now.
I told Alex that I was going on a trip.
Did you?
But I was going on a date
Date! With who?
With another woman.
Man, that’s not on.
I told Alex that I'll be leaving for two weeks on a trip.
Sounds like fun...where are you going?
I'm actually not really going on a trip.
Are you not? Where are you going then?
I'm going on a date with another woman.
Why didn't you tell me when I called? That's awful! I'll call you tomorrow, you need to tell me about it.
I messed up. I told Alex I was going on a trip but I didn't
What did you do? Why didn't you go on the trip?
I went on a date with another woman.
Why would you do that to Alex?
Our relationship hasn't been that good lately. We have been fighting a lot
I think you need to tell her the truth, because you dating someone else isn't right.
I have broken my girlfriend's heart.
What exactly did you do this time?
She knew I cheated and I still told lies about it
You should tell her the truth and plead with her.
I mean she barely even kissed me, she is more like a friend.
You knew what you were doing.
I think you are making a way to big deal of this.
Would you like it if your girlfriend was kissing someone else?
No but it was just like a peck on a cheek.
Whatever, you were getting busy in the bathroom I heard.
I am Kendall's mathematics tutor.
She says you are very good at your job.
I will always ensure to give efficient answer to every students.
You are really great.
I am just doing my job.
Teach us some maths too!
I know they fired me because I am gay, no matter what they say.
They pretend to be tolerant but they really are evil.
They act like they're accepting of anything, but they are always filled with hate.
I think you should file a lawsuit against them.
I think that is the only way they will be held accountable.
I am sorry this happened to you, but I will stand with you my good friend.
I tested the student's scores.
How did it go?
I wasn't happy with the work of the students.
Just talk to them and let them know about it.
I know but it's tough.
Have some faith in them.
Ugh I need to find a new approach to teaching my students Economics, they are not getting it.
Why do you say that?
The test score's results were awful. Not one good grade in the entire class, this does not make me happy.
Yikes, sounds like you're right, maybe you need to make it more interactive, more exciting?
I'll try, how exciting can you make Economics haha,? Maybe a trip is in order?
That's a great idea, get their interest back!
The students results are very disappointing.
Did they fail?
Some did but some did their work with barely a passing grade.
I hope they can retake the test
Yes I'm redoing it, maybe it was too difficult.
I'd say so, time to revise.
Kendall had a pretty bad allergic reaction the other day.
What triggered it this time?
She was stung by a bee. I had to rush her to the hospital.
Were you in the park? How far away was your car?
It was a block away. We had to run for it.
So she wasn't incapacitated by the allergic reaction until later?
I'm sorry I was so stubborn with my friend earlier
What happened?
He said football is a better sport than basketball because it is more physical and more fun. I disagreed but now I see his point.
Maybe you should invite them to a football game to reconcile?
Sounds like a great idea
I had an argument with Jess and realized I was wrong.
What were you fighting about?
Well, I thought Jeff was being taken advantage of by his girlfriend.
So was he mad when you brought it up?
Yes. But then I realized that it wasn't my place to say anything, so I was in the wrong.
I'm glad you guys worked it out.
I had a heated argument with a friend.
You couldn't agree?
No, but since I evaluated my position and changed my mind.
You mean that you were wrong?
Yes, I saw I was wrong and my friend and I were able to see eye to eye.
You are a good person for doing that.
So I ended up puling the trigger on that opportunity that I mentioned to you.
Oh yeah, how did it go?
It went pretty well. I just knew I had to jump on it as soon as possible
Good for you! Yeah you can't let those kind of opportunities pass you by.
Exactly, life is far too short.
Indeed, you have to make the most of it.
I just sold a photograph for $2,000! Can you believe it?
That's a lot of money. What was the picture?
I was at the airport and saw Brad Pitt coming down the escalator. He had a bunch of people around him and so I didn't think I could get a shot.
So it was a picture of Brad Pitt?
Yes, I finally had a split second where I could see him and I took the photo. It came out really good and I was able to sell it.
We're going to have to start the meeting one way or the other.
But we're still missing a few people.
They knew what time we were meeting at. If they're late, we'll catch them up when they get here.
I guess we can't wait around all day.
I said to Kai that she looked very good in his new outfit!
Do You actually like it?
I do! It makes him look very handsome.
I bet he was worried you wouldn't.
Ye probably was, but I did like it so I told him.
I'm sure he really appreciated it.
I'm so screwed.
Why?
I forgot to study for my test last night.
Oh no! Do you think you'll still be able to pass?
I don't know.
Hopefully you will.
I feel so stupid that I didn't study for the test last night.
I'm sure you will do well because you're really smart.
Thank you. Yeah, I just wish that I would have studied some things just in case I forget them.
Well, just try and look them up before you take the test so you can have a quick reminder?
That sounds like a good idea to me.
I can't believe it is an hour till the test and I forgot to study for it!
Don't worry, the material seems to be very easy to remember.
I hope so, because I went to all the classes but I just feel like I needed time to study.
Next time, just make an alarm on your phone to remind you to study the night before.
That is a good idea, just wish me luck for this test today ok?
Ok, good luck and just breathe easy while you're taking it.
Why didn't I study last night?
You had to study? We gamed for like 8 hours!
I know, I thought I understood this stuff.
Did you fail?
Big time
Sorry man.
That wreck Jordan and I came across was really horrible.
What was it?
It was a car accident, there were bodies everywhere.
That sounds horrific.
Yeah, I had to turn Jordan's face away so he wouldn't have recurring nightmares.
That's a really smart thing to do.
I just saw a terrible wreck today.
Oh, no. Was anyone hurt?
Sure looked like it. There were people on stretchers and even a fire.
That sounds terrible.
Yeah, I had to turn Jordan's face away so he wouldn't have nightmares.
Aw, you're such a nice sister. Sorry you had to see that today.
I finally finished my book project I've been putting off for years.
Oh you mean fixing all those old books?
Yeah, kind of. I just bound them all together to keep them stable. They were really falling apart.
Some of those books are worth a lot of money. That's good that you finally did that.
I'll keep them this way until I can afford to take them in to a professional book binder.
That's a great idea. Save a little money each month until you can do that.
While cleaning out my grandfathers attic I found a bunch of old books.
Wow, that sounds cool.
It was, the books were so old I had to tape them together to keep them stable.
Are you going to read them or just keep them in a safe place?
I'm going to read them and then put them in a safe place haha.
Sounds like a good idea!
Ash was assigned to my team today.
How are you guys working out?
She follows directions better than I thought.
That should make her easier to work with.
It really did. I gave her an overview and she was off and running.
Well I'm happy that you finally got some help.
I asked Jan to clean up the messy room with the toys on the floor.  Jan cleaned it up without being asked again.
That's so nice of her.
She helps out a lot when she comes over.
Probably because she can tell you need the help.
It's overwhelming being a single dad with two young twins.
I can imagine.
My alarm didn't go off this morning. I was late for work.
Did you set it before you went to bed?
Not sure. I was so tired from a night out with my friends I might have not.
Where did you go?
We went bar hopping. It was my friend's last day in town. She's moving to Washington for college.
I see.  Did you guys have a good time?
Thanks for grabbing my laundry from the drop off laundry mat, I totally forgot it
No problem, I knew you were in a hurry to move out of the apartment and that you might forget something.
Yeah but two whole loads of laundry, that's a lot.
Its okay, I know the last couple of weeks with the new roommate really stressed you out.
Yeah, sorry man, I just can't live with that guy, he just drives me crazy.
You were talking about moving in with your girlfriend anyway, this just helped you along.
I had to drop by the apartment to grab my laundry before my lease is up tomorrow.
I didn't know you were moving. Where are you going to be?
I've got a little place a few blocks from my job. The commute was killing me!
I can see that. I liked you old apartment a lot. What's the new place like?
It's smaller, but there is a balcony, and I'll have an on-site gym and pool.
Oh cool! I'm down with the amenities. Congratulations on the new place!
You know how I'm going to be moving soon?
Yeah, what about it?
I had to go to my apartment one last time to get my laundry.
Was it clean?
No it stunk to heaven.
God, that's gross.
I think I am done packing up everything before we move out.
Just make sure we don't leave anything behind.
I would hate to lose out on my security deposit.
I don't think you will because we haven't messed anything up too bad.
I would hope so.
Well this is my last day in the Pines.
Aww no. Where are you moving to now Casey?
The other side of town. I just came to get my laundry.
Here are all your things. It's gonna be awful with you not around.
Aww, that's sweet of you to say. I'm gonna miss this place.
Well best wishes. Casey.
You should never go to the French cafe down the street.
But I heard it has five star reviews.
I waited for service at my table for 45 minutes. It was such a waste of time.
Wow, how was the food though?
I left before getting any food.
That's a bold statement to make to the waitstaff.
I just had the most amazing meal over at my parents' house.
Cool, there's nothing like your mother's cooking! She's so talented.
Oh yeah, she drives me nuts sometimes, but she is a whizz in the kitchen, I'll admit that.
What did she make for you? One of her specialties?
Yup, her world-famous veal picatta. My all-time favorite.
Yum! That sounds fantastic. I want to try that sometime.
We had dinner with my parents last night. My mom cooked.
You were tired when you left work so that must have been a blessing.
Yes it was!  And my mom even packed some for me to take home for lunch today.
Your mom is the best.
She is. Everything was so good last night.
What did she cook?
What is with the 5 course steak and lobster dinner tonight?
I don't know, I was going to ask you that same question!
Do you think my mom knows we got a new job out of college?
I don't know how she would know, but it would make sense as to why she made us an awesome meal.
Should we ask her or should we just thank her and eat?
I think we need to thank her, and then ask her!
I proposed to Skylar today and she accepted!
Congratulations!
I know. I told her I wanted a fancy wedding in June and she's all for it.
I need to call her too.
Yeah, do call her. She loves to talk about it.
I asked Skylar to be my wife. I told her I want to plan a fancy wedding for June.
You already have a month in mind?
Well, yes.
That's kind of a lot of pressure. Did you ask her when she wanted to get married?
All she said was June was a lovely month for a wedding.
Are you sure she's not just being polite?
Hey, I was hired by Casey to take care of her divorce.
Oh wow, she must feel scared and alone so your help must feel nice.
Yes I really need to ensure her financial and mental safety
That's really good of you to be this attentive to her needs.
I gave Casey the best advice that I could regarding her divorce.
I know that you are a terrific attorney.
Well, I always put my client’s interests first.
What I love about you is that you give free consultations.
I try to give legal advice in any way that I can.
That’s wonderful!
I was so hungry. I did not have breakfast.
What did you eat?
I had tacos for lunch?
I would have loved that
There’s a nice Mexican restaurant across the street.
Good to know!
I just got finished eating some tacos. They were delicious.
Ha. Why are you eating tacos at 10 in the morning?
I skipped breakfast, so figured I'd have an early lunch.
That makes sense. What kind of meat did you use?
I decided to go with chicken, so they were lighter on my stomach.
Good choice. I'm trying to cut down on red meat too.
The move went well, I just don't know where any of the stores are at yet.
Why don't you download a local map to your phone?
That's a great idea, I had not thought of that.
Happy to help my friend. I can also show you around if you would like.
I just discovered a problem with moving to a new town: trying to find the stores you need!
Try looking online at Yelp or other review sites.
Yeah, I guess I could do that. But I need to know how far I have to drive.
I can see how that would be kind of frustrating. Think of it as an adventure instead.
That's a good spin to put on it. I'll take a day to explore the town.
Make it a fun day, and it won't feel like work at all.
Man I got lost today, I'm still not familiar after the move
Where were you trying to go?
Oh, just the CVS
The one on Langley?
Yeah, somehow I ended up on the other side of town.
Woah sorry. Just give me a call next time.
We had a meeting today that my job might have start laying people off. It was very tense
I'm sure everyone was very uncomfortable.
Everyone was until I made a joke. It broke the tension.
Leave it to Austin to lighten the mood!
I don't like to be stressed. I know others don't either.
Then it's a good thing you know lots of jokes.
I just got out of the worst meeting. I had to tell a joke to break the ice.
Nice way to put your sense of humor to work.
Seriously!! I had to do something, it was so tense in there.
What was the problem?
Just a lot of people who didn't know each other well, but were thrown together for this project.
Gotcha. That can be a very awkward situation.
So, I had to ask some random girl to move today. She was just standing in the way.
So the girl just stood right there and didn’t move?
Yeah, it was like she was in a trance.
Maybe she was day dreaming hard huh?
Yeah I'm wondering what she was thinking about.
Why is that girl blocking the way?
I think she's just talking to her friend and doesn't know she's in the way.
I'm gonna ask her to let us by
That sounds like a good plan.
Yeah, just wait for me a second.
I'll be here.
I just love spending time with my family.
What do you do on with them?
On Sunday we go to church.
And do you take your dogs with you? I know how attached you are to your pets.
No I leave them home, I do miss them though.
I can imagine, but family is important
Yesterday I was at my parents' again for lunch.
Oh, that's right, you go there every Sunday after church services, don't you?
Yeah, Mom's a great cook! I look forward to it every week!
I'll bet! It's nice that you and your family are so close.
I wish I could visit with them longer, but I can't leave the dogs alone for too long so I usually go straight home right after eating.
I'm sure your family understands.
I need some emotional support again. I just can't handle the daily nature of this world.
I'm sorry to hear that. Feel free to tell me about how you're feeling.
I got hit in the face by my boyfriend again. It really hurts and there is a big bruise.
I can see that. This must be really difficult for you.
I tried covering it up with my hair but Jordan saw right through that. It made me feel so weak and powerless.
You have friends and family you can turn to in times like these. Hang in there.
It's really hot today. Do you want to go in the pool?
Are you sure? That water looks freezing.
Yeah, I'm sure it's fine. I'm just going to jump in.
Well, I'll let you test it.
Oh god, the water is too cold!
Yeah I told you so. I think I'll stay out of the water.
It was so hot when I got home from the grocery store, I wanted to get into the pool.
So did you go for a swim?
Yes, I put my groceries away first then I changed into my suit and hopped in.
That must have felt really refreshing.
It did! I stayed in for about half an hour. But my face got sunburned because I forgot to put on sunscreen first!
Ouch! You need to be more careful next time.
It topped 95 degrees at 2pm, and Becky's pool looked so blue, cool, and refreshing.
So you threw your suit on and jumped in?
You bet! I did a few laps, and settled down in the shallow end to savour the feeling.
Was Becky there?
No, she volunteers at the thrift store on Tuesdays, but our relationship has become close, and she gave me a key to the pool house.
So she's more than just a good friend?
Hey, nice to see you out here. I couldn't wait to get to the pool.
I know what you mean. It's so hot out here.
Yes, and my air conditioner isn't working well.
Oh no, did you call the super because you need that AC.
Yeah, I put a call in but he's booked for a few days so I guess I'll be in the pool a lot.
That's where I'd be, too. You can always visit me if you get too hot, my air conditioner works just fine.
I feel so refreshed now, man, I needed that.
What did you do?
I went swimming right after my run. Right when I got home I changed right into my bathing suit and jumped right in. I was so sweaty and hot.
I don't blame you. It's like, 90 degrees out today. Way too hot for a run.
Yes but I had to squeeze in a workout. Thank the lord for swimming pools!
I know, I wish I had a pool at my place. Maybe I'll join a gym that has one.
I could not imagine not having my party.
I missed the party!
Yes! despite the storm, I threw the dinner party.
Was it so fun?
Yes it was, people turned up!
That's great!
So did you make it home safely last night?
Yeah, though I probably should have taken you up on your offer to stay over. The roads were pretty slick after the storm.
Yeah next time just stay over. A few people did.
Where did everyone sleep?
In the living room. Mary took the sofa and everyone else just spread out on the floor. It was like a junior high slumber party!
Oh that sounds fun! Yes next time I'll do that. And thanks again for inviting me to the party. It was great.
The storm was crazy last night.
Did you still throw the party?
Yes I did, everyone was safe indoors.
I hope the dinner party was still great.
Yeah my anxiety cooled down once we started.
I wish I went!
I am throwing a party tonight.
Isn't there a storm tonight?
I don't think it will be that bad.
OK then, let's get ready.
I just hope my guests will still come.
If they don't, we can party by ourselves.
My foster home that I set up already has 3 kids coming to it by the end of the month.
You must be so excited!
I have always wanted to be a parent but this is what I was called to do in life.
What you are doing for these kids is amazing and you are an incredible person for doing it.
Maybe you can come help me sometimes with the kids if you want?
I would love to help out in any way I can.
When I found out I couldn't have children it was devastating.
I know it must have been. I know how you have always wanted to be a mom.
But after a lot of thought, I believed that it would be fulfilling for me to be a foster parent.
And did you go through the process to adopt a child?
I did, and guess what? I was approved and now I'm going to provide a foster home for lots of children!
That's so great! I'm so happy for you, and I just know you're going to find that your decision will be so rewarding for you!
I got this new game yesterday, it is great fun.
What's the game about?
It's all about robbing banks.
That sounds exciting and dangerous!
It really is, my character managed to rob a bank but was caught straight after.
Wow, the police is always one step ahead.
Dude, what are you doing later? I need your help.
I am just going to be hanging with my girl, why what's up?
I need a lot of money, and fast!
Okay, so what do you need help with? You know I don't have that kind of cash.
I know, I am going to rob the bank by the grocery store, and I need a look out.
No way, I am not going to be getting myself in that situation.
I am so exhausted!
Why are you exhausted?
I have been working overtime at my job to make enough money to pay off all my bills.
Does anyone else help out with your bills?
No, I pay my bills on my own. So I have to work a lot to be able to afford everything.
Well, I hope your job gives you that raise soon so you don't have to work as hard.
I think I'm going to go to bed early tonight. I'm really tired.
Did you have a long day at work?
It's not just work. I had to pay all my bills today, and that was really tiring to sort out.
Paying bills is always a stressful time, but I bet you'll be happy you finished it when you wake up tomorrow.
I've been really working hard lately.
I know. You must be saving tons of money.
Nope. I've been paying off all my bills. I'm so tired.
Wow. It's so cool you're going debt free!
Yeah. I'm pretty happy about it. But man, I'm exhausted.
I hear you. The good thing is, you'll be less stressed, now that you're out of debt!
I always appreciate the time Jordan and I spent together and I'm glad we were able to get over the hard parts in our relationship
I hope Jordan is sorry for cheating on you.
A one time mistake isn't enough to ruin mine and Jordan's relationship.
As long as you are happy together.
Yes we are very happy together.
I really just want to be happy.
How can you be happy with a cheater?
When I'm not with her, I feel pain.
The pain is natural and will go away.
I cannot deal with pain right now.
You'll have more pain if you stay.
I really enjoy this game. I think I will win this one.
Hmm, I wonder who the murderer is.
I think I know something important.
You think you know the murder weapon?
I already know the murder weapon, but I am not saying it yet!
These mystery games always have so many components.
I don't play too many mystery games. Do you like them?
I love them but you have to really think motives, weapons, timing.
Do you get to write stuff down so you remember what you suspect?
I guess you could. I think Casey takes notes as we are playing.
That sounds like a good idea so you can see all your thoughts in one place.
I already know what the murder weapon is. I will crack this case wide open.
Are you an investigator now?
I am playing a murder mystery game with Casey. Casey has already given me some clues to who the murderer might be.
I wouldn't enjoy such a game. I am scared of death
Casey and I were playing a murder mystery game. We needed to find out who the murderer was.
Who killed somebody?
I was the murderer but Casey didn't know that.
What was the murder weapon?
I used a dagger. That was my weapon.
You're a cold-hearted killer.
I think Sydney really needs to think about her family before making the big move.
Well, she said she got their full support on the move. Its only for five years.
I said she will have to consider the job she's giving up at home. Its a killer job.
Every city has Amazon jobs. I am sure she will get another one.
I just really don't want Sydney to go away for a long time.
I am sure she will come back and visit.
I just can't let Sydney leave.
I know it is a long time but it is a good opportunity for her.
I don't care, I don't want to live without her near me.
Do you really want her to stay that badly?
I know I'm selfish but I need her to stay with me.
You should speak to Sydney about this.
I totally lost my cool today and threw half my binders on the floor at work.
Woah, that's a bit crazy. What got you that upset?
I was so angry with that guy in accounting. He has criticized my project and sent me back three times to redo it.
I can see why you'd snap after three times. You'd better get your boss involved.
I did because he saw the mess. He calmed me down and said he'd take care of it.
What a good guy. I hope he smooths it out for you.
I am really mad right now! I told someone at work to finish everything last night and they didn't!
I'm really sorry about that Robin, can you not speak to your manager about them?
No, and they never change!
Please don't be mad. Everyone is watching you.
I don't care!
Don't lose your cool.
I really blew it today at work. My colleague in digital media was supposed to have that presentation ready for me to review by 3:00PM today and he hadn't even started on it! I freaked out and started yelling at him about what I was supposed to tell the client.
Oh yikes, that's terrible. Did he let you know that he wasn't going to be ready by that time?
No, he didn't say anything. As a matter of fact, I asked him yesterday about his progress and he said he was almost done!
Wow, so he basically lied to you. Have you had this problem with him in the past?
Yes, many times. He's never ready when I need him to be, and it's never him that gets in trouble. I'm the one who has to answer to the client whenever we make mistakes or don't hit deadlines.
I know. I'm sorry. That really stinks. You should talk to his supervisor about the situation and see if the supervisor can't get him to shape up a little bit.
Want to go out after work and have a drink? I need to blow off some steam.
Sure, did something happen today?
Yeah, I got in fight with John in accounting this afternoon.
He's a pain, what did he say?
He was going on about how if women want more respect at work they need to dress less sexy. I lost my cool and yelled at him and then went to HR.
Good for you! For that, I will buy you the first round.
I didn't realize that Jesse had company coming over, and I accidentally ate his breakfast!
How do you accidentally eat someone's breakfast?
Well, he had two plates out, and it was only me and him. So while he was in the shower, I ate the other plate of food.
Well that sounds like a Sydney thing to do in my opinion!
No one asked for your opinion sir!
Don't get salty, I am just being sarcastic.
What do you tell your children about bullying?
We really haven't discussed it yet. Have you?
Yes, I've told them never to be bullies and to stand up to bullies, whether being bullied themselves or if someone else is being bullied.
I get the not bullying part, but isn't it dangerous to stand up to bullies?
I am not advocating violence, but rather not to be shamed or let other people be shamed.
I think I see what you're saying, don't let the bullies get to you.
I have always taught my children to not be bullies.
I think that's a good lesson for kids these days.
But I also believe it's important for them to stand up for others as well if they see it.
It think that's great they you're teaching them these lessons at a young age.
I think it's going to make them better adults.
Well, they have good parents to learn from.
I met someone new in the park today.
Oh really, were they nice?
Yes, it was a girl I had seen in the park before.
What did the two of you do?
We just had a conversation about a spot in the park that the both of us enjoyed.
That's great!
I found a nice new spot in the park today.
That's cool what did you get up to?
I found a girl there.
Did you know her?
I didn't at first but I struck up a conversation about the spot we both enjoyed.
That sounds lovely.
I'm going to eat it as I don't like to waste food but I'm not going to like it.
Sasha just throw that apple out!
No! I paid for it.
Just give it to the birds, you're going to get sick!
Ill be fine I have an iron stomach and I like to take the bitter with the sweet anyway.
We'll see in a few hours.
I was eating this apple today and at first it was sweet.
So it was a good apple?
And then it was bitter.
That's not usual for an apple.
And then I noticed it had holes.
I hope you stopped eating and threw it away.
That apple was really good.
I had no idea you even liked apples.
I do. I love the bitter and sweet parts of it.
No wonder you had no problem finishing it.
My only issue with it was there were holes in it.
As long as there were no worms I think you're good.
I feel ill right now.
Why?
Cause I like apples but this has holes in it.
Oh that's sweet and sour experience.
Let's keep searching this box that we found in the basement.
I hope that we find what we're looking for.
I'm going to keep going through it. I found some great things so far.
Maybe we can get some money?
I'm almost certain that there is money somewhere in this huge box.
I hope we find it.
I have an idea.
I like your ideas.
I thought we might find money on the beach.
I say let's get started.
With that attitude and my determination, we cannot fail.
Grab the metal detector.
I'm going look for buried treasure on the beach.
Do you really think that you will find anything?
History says that there were pirates here.
So you think you will find pirate treasure.
That's the point.
Well, if you find it, I don't mind sharing.
I know there's money buried on that hill. I need to find it.
Where would we start? That's a lot of digging.
I found a map in my attic. It was my grandpa's. It shows where he buried his money.
Let's get on with it then. Get the map and I'll get the shovels.
We will split what we find.
That's the only fair thing to do since I'm helping you.
That money was mine.
No it wasn't Carson!
How would you know?
I saw you take it.
Wait what?
I caught you red handed.
These paints Carson let me borrow are amazing.
That's so nice of Carson.
I never knew that there were so many shades of blue out there.
Have you been painting skies or seas with the blue?
I am painting a boat on the raging seas.
That sounds fantastic. You'll have to show me when you're done.
Man I need to get this idea out of my head but I don't have any more paint.
Will you have to go to the shop?
No, luckily Carson lets me borrow his paints.
That's so generous of him.
I wouldn't be able to finish otherwise.
Let me know when you're done.
I did some painting today.
I didn't know you had paints.
My friend Carson let me use his paints.
Does he have a lot?
Yeah. Carson has a big set.
What did you paint?
I am having such a great time at the nursing home.
It seems like the patients morale has improved ever since you started working there.
I love my job and love making people happy.
I guess you were really meant for this job.
I got a note from my boss today.
What did it say?
She had given me a pat on the back for the job I am doing at the hospital.
That's great! You always try to make the patients feel better.
I do my best, I know how much they are suffering right now especially from the pandemic.
I know but you know what, these people will remember you one day.
I never imaged Taylor to be a gentleman.
He used to pull my hair.
On our date Taylor went around to the other side of the car and opened my door.
What has gotten into him?
I think he wanted to get give a good impression.
He better do more than just open a car door.
Taylor opened the car door for me on our date.
Wow. What a gentleman.
That's what I said. He said don't get used to it.
So was he just putting on a show.
It's hard to say. I need to get to know him better.
Well I hope you found a gentleman.
I cannot believe how much of a gentleman Taylor is.
Why, what happened?
You know we had a date last night, right?
Yes, I remember that you were telling me about it.
He would always come over to my side of the car to open the door!
That is nice, but maybe the inside door handle was broken and he had to.
I faced my fears today and went into the old haunted house.
I didn't think you'd have the guts to do it, to be honest.
I just took a deep breath and then went inside. It was important for me to finish that task and prove to myself that I could do it.
You proved something to me too. You're a lot braver than I gave you credit for.
I just ate some burgers.
You look like you're really full.
I am. I also had a giant shake with them.
Is that why you're so happy?
Yeah. I capped it all off with a smile.
You should have saved me some.
I'm so happy I finished that big project.
How did you celebrate the end?
I had a big smile then I ate some burgers and a giant shake.
That must have been delicious.
It was so indulgent, I'm going on a diet now.
But it must have been satisfying.
I am having such a great day!
I wondered what had you smiling so big!
I had a burger and a shake, so good!
That does sound good.
I couldn't help but smile!
I'm glad you had a great time.
Did you complete all your mandatory courses for this semester yet?
All except math, my final is next week.
Good luck! I finished all my math courses so I'm going to take advanced calculus for extra credit.
You are crazy man, that is going to be so challenging.
It won't be too bad, for some reason I just don't find math that difficult.
Well I guess someone has to understand it, but not me!
I took advanced calculus in high school.
Wow, that is so advanced of you.
Yes it's truly a gift from God.
We look up to you.
Thanks I'd like to see what's next.
College probably.
I sure hope I can get into a major Science college.
I'm sure you can. You're a math whiz and they'll be knocking down your door.
I love math. I even loved advanced calculus in high school that everyone hated.
Quit bragging. I just took the mandatory math courses.
I had to take those, too, before calculus.
Oh, boy, I think I did some embarrassing stuff last night.
Yes, you drank way too much beer, got drunk and made quite a spectacle of yourself.
That's what I was afraid of. Did I at least keep all my clothes on?
Yes, thank goodness for small favours.
Right? Luckily I only do that about once a year.
Yes, definitely good thing.
I loved playing hide and seek.
That's such a fun game, who did you play with?
I played with Ash and the kids.
That's lovely.
I counted and told Ash to hide somewhere.
That sounds fun.
I told Ash to hide in the Bathroom, by the hamper.
Were you playing hide and seek?
Yes, with the kids too!
That sounds like a fun activity.
Yes we all had a great time.
You're such a fun family.
It took us 3 hours to find Ash!
Where did you end up finding him?
He was in the chest out in the greenhouse. Best hide and seek spot ever.
You need to get your son a award, the greatest hiding spot.
I just finished Casey's job application.
That's nice Kendall, did Casey need some help?
Yes, she suffers from dyslexia so finds it hard to read and write the applications.
I am sure she appreciates your help immensely.
I think she does, I just really want her to get the interview so she can show off her skills then.
Hopefully Casey will finally land a job.
I keep saying to Casey that she doesn't need to do everything on your own.
Did she need help with the job application?
Yes, she is dyslexic and I know this sort of thing is hard for her.
I know she really wants this job too.
As soon as they see her qualifications, they're going to hire her on the spot. She'll be a great worker!
I filled out an application for Casey for an interview. She's dyslexic and has problems with that.
Won't that make the employer think Casey is not capable of handling paperwork?
I don't know, that's what I was wondering. I figured Casey could wow them in the interview and they wouldn't notice.
I hope you're right. I would worry about hiring someone who can't fill out their own application.
Now I'm really worried.
The baby will be here and I need to fire and baby proof this house.
You take the back rooms and I will do the front, that way it will go quicker.
Yeah, that will make it go faster, thanks for you help.
That is my niece, I would do anything for her!
I went through the entire house and try to make it fireproof.
How do you make a house fire proof?
Do you have to go around and check a variety of things to make sure they're within standards.
Do you think you can come over and help me do the same to my house?
I think I have some time this weekend if that works for you?
I'll let you know the time and place.
I had the day off today but I decided I wanted to be productive anyways.
It's always nice to have some time off. What were you up to?
I was preparing for a feast which has been a family tradition for years.
I'm assuming that involves cooking.
It does. I spent all day cooking. I made rib roast, potatoes, stuffing, salad and some fresh bread.
Sounds like a lot of work but I'm sure your family really enjoyed it.
My teacher Mr. Cameron gave me the black belt title last night.
You have worked so hard for that black belt. I still on my blue.
Keep working hard and you will get it.
Well you show me some of the harder stances?
I felt like I worked so hard for the title Cameron gave me.
I felt like you did too.
I was training every day in the morning and in the evenings for hours.
It all paid off for you though.
That's true, you get out what you put in.
And you put in a lot so you should be getting a lot out of it.
I have some good news to report from my job today.
Did you get a bonus?
I got promoted from my boss Cameron. He bestowed me with a new job title.
A new job title! What were you promoted to?
Cameron, the VP of Marketing promoted me to Regional Manager for the Midwest. I worked hard and earned that position.
It's always good to know that your hard work has been rewarded. I'm so happy for you.
Did Jesse call you to ask if you wanted to go to the zoo with him?
No, but he did say that you already told him no.
Yeah I have to work.
That's sad that you will have to miss out on the trip.
It will be okay, I will go next time.
That's good then.
Have you heard from Jesse about going to the zoo?
No, I don't often speak to Jesse, why do you ask?
Jesse has been asking all my friends if they might like to go to the zoo.
Did he invite you as well?
No, he hasn't said a word to me.
That's very strange!
I need to make a phone call to Jesse I want to know if he wants to go to the zoo.
Oh that sounds fun I haven't been in such a long time.
It's Jesse's birthday and he said to my friend he wanted to go to the zoo.
I know he's going to be happy about going he's been talking about it so much.
I'm finalizing the details I'll surprise him by inviting some friends.
I bet he'll have a blast!
I need to get a new broom when I get to the store. My kids were playing quidditch with it and broke it! I glued the broom back together, but it won't last long.
My kids are also Harry Potter fans. But instead of playing with brooms they collect sticks.
I like the movies too. I am not going to lie.
They could be doing worse things than playing with brooms and sticks.
I know, we will miss these times when they leave for college.
We surely will.
I prevent sickness in women.
Are you a health specialist?
Yes, a gynaecologist.
What level?
I am the states number one expert.
Cool.
I am very proud of the work that I do.
As you should be.
Thank you. It feels nice to know that I am the number one expert in gynaecology in our state.
Yes that is a great accomplishment.
I am much more proud of the sickness that I have prevented in women.
Agreed, you have saved many lives.
I wish it wasn't so cold outside, it was such a long walk to the train station.
It is a long walk and seems even longer when it's cold.
I put on my coat, my scarf, gloves, and hat.
Who did you go with?
I went with Jan, she asked to borrow a scarf.
I hope you two had a good walk.
I let Jan borrow my scarf.
You don't usually let anyone borrow that scarf.
Yeah, but Jan had a long walk in the cold.
I remember the daily high was 20 yesterday.
Yeah, and it was 5 degrees at the overnight low.
When is Jan returning the scarf?
My friend put down diapers on her registry for the baby.
Those come in handy.
I thought so especially with a new-born.
When is the party?
Next week. I was shopping for some clothes for myself and thought I should grab some diapers as well.
Good call.
I've never bought diapers before. I hope I got the right stuff.
Did you get the smallest size? They should have new-born.
Yes. I saw new-born on the package.
Then they should be ok. And if not the baby will grown into them.
You are right. I just know she doesn't have much money and I want to help out.
Diapers are a big help so I'm sure she is appreciative.
I was thinking all last week about what to gift my friend.
What are you giving a gift for?
Well, she just had a baby so just a little something.
What did you end up getting?
I just got the baby diapers.
That's a great gift. It won't go unused.
I'm going to a party on Saturday so I bought diapers.
Why'd you buy diapers for a party?
Oh, it's a baby shower.
Oh how fun! Who's having a baby?
My friend from high school is having her first child.
Congratulations to her and her brand new family.
I can tell that Skylar is exhausted.
How do you know that?
I think it is obvious from how she has her head buried in her arms that she needs a break.
Why don't you show her to the bedroom?
Guess what car I just bought?
Did you buy the new Speedster?
I did. How'd you guess?
I knew you would want to own it.
I was talking about the new car that was released this week. There's so much hype about it.
Don't you own that car?
My father bought it for me as a gift. I wanted to show it off. I took my friends for a ride around town.
Is it that red car I saw blasting music down the street yesterday.
Most likely it is. My car is red.
You are such show off.
You need to see the engine. It's awesome.
I can't believe you bought one already.
I traded a couple of other cars that were just sitting around.
Well you really made a great deal.
I just couldn't wait to show it off.
I hope you take it to the car show next month.
This has really been fun.
We haven't had a conversation like this in a long time.
The drinks didn't hurt.
Yes, I really love this bar.
Oh, my gosh, look at the time; I'm late for picking up my kids from day-care!
Well, you've had too much to drink; you better call somebody.
I am having such a great time today, thank you for inviting me out for a spa day, I so needed it.
Its always important to have some me time so you can relax and unwind.
Its true, nothing that a manicure and a hour long massage can't undo.
Don't forget all the time in the sauna and mineral pools.
Wait what time is it, oh god, I forgot to pick up the kids from day care!
I'll pay, you get out of here and get them.
I heard about how Cameron had gotten sick from school.
Yeah, he definitely got sick from somebody. I just don't know who he got sick from.
It does not even matter at this point, he should just focus on getting better.
I know, he need to rest and drink fluids.
I also brought him some flowers.
Thanks Quinn, you are such a great friend to Cameron.
Cameron sent me the most beautiful bouquet of flowers when I was sick at home.
When were you sick? Are you better now?
I got really sick a couple of weeks ago.  My whole body ached and my doctor couldn't figure out what was the matter with me.
That's a horrible feeling.
I heard that Cameron wasn't feeling very well recently so I returned the favour and sent him some flowers too.
That's nice of you.
It really gets to me how rude some of these people on Facebook are.
I know. Don't let them get to you.
I responded to this nasty comment online, but I really had to think about what I had to say.
Just don't respond. No matter what you say, you get attacked. So what happened?
I got attacked. I had to block the person.
See, I told you so!
I did go to that concert but I didn't sit with everyone else.
Why didn't you sit with the rest of the group?
I ended up buying my ticket a week later than everyone else even though I wanted to go.
Why didn't you buy your ticket when everyone else bought a ticket?
I wanted to buy my ticket with my boyfriend to make sure we were able to sit together.
That makes sense. Otherwise he may have had to sit by himself.
I am so upset about the accident. Sydney would not let me see it because of the blood.
Yeah, you know you get sick and the last thing needed was a fainting person too
I hope they are going to be ok. It was horrible.
Yeah I heard that they will fully recover. Just mostly superficial.
That is a relief.
I'm away from all the craziness.
I saw that Sydney didn't want you to see the blood though.
Yes, that's true.
It was really bad and lots of blood.
Yes, I don't want to see that.
Just relax man.
I really appreciated how Sydney kept me away from all the commotion.
Weren't you interested to see what happened at the accident sight?
Not really after Sydney told me there was a lot of blood.
You don't like the sight of blood?
No. It makes me feel sick.
That makes sense. I've seen you get dizzy when I get a nose bleed.
Alex was such a help yesterday.
He told me that you called him and he came over to help with dinner.
Your grandson saved my life, the dinner had been planned for months and I was feeling so poorly.
He is always willing to lend a hand to a person in need.
I need something to eat but don't feel up to making anything.
Why not ask Alex to cook something for the both of you?
I feel bad since she just cooked for me last night and the night before too.
But Alex loves to cook, you know that.
That's true, and she makes it look so easy to cook healthy and delicious meals.
I'm sure she won't mind you asking, especially since you don't feel well enough to cook yourself.
I know it's wrong of me to do and I need to change my behaviour.
You do as that's very cruel.
I'm going to try my best to change this as soon as possible.
If you don't, you won't be able to be on TV much longer.
I need to make sure this pretty face is on TV as much as possible.
Then do the right thing and apologize and stop engaging in such behaviour anymore.
Luck just looked down on me my friend.
That is wonderful to hear.
On my beat as a newspaper reporter I got an exclusive.
Please tell me more about it.
I happened to get an exclusive interview with a famous reclusive actress, Judy Garland.
I hate to burst your bubble but Judy Garland is dead and there are a million impostors.
This interview is the chance of a lifetime.
That sounds important, who is it with?
It's an exclusive interview so unfortunately that information is confidential.
Can you not even give me a hint?
Well, I will say one thing, it is with a famous reclusive actress.
I can't wait to see it.
Did you see my article in the paper?
The one on the actress, Shania Smith?
Yeah. I have to say, interviewing her was a life long dream. I never thought it would happen.
I don't think anyone did. She hasn't spoken to the press in 30 years. How did you get her to speak with you?
My godmother designed her wardrobe in the 1960s and 1970s. They were having lunch when I stopped by to see her. Things went from there.
Wow. That is pretty lucky. Congratulations on the article.
I hate depending on people to open the store for me.
Isn't that part of your employees jobs?
Yeah. But I usually open. They come in and do the other work but I open.
Well what happened that somebody else had to open for you?
I was running late and asked Taylor to do it.
I don't see what the big deal is.
Well, Taylor was there to open up the store.
Where were you? It's your store.
I was busy. I have a lot of things going on.
I know. Is everything OK? You seem a bit down.
Maybe we should go out for some drinks, just to pep me up.
I don't know if that's a good idea.
Hey I'm looking for antiques. Can you help me?
Sure Jesse. What kind you looking for?
Priceless wonders and ancient heirlooms.
Is this one look at it. It's so cool.
Yes, that looks quite valuable.
We should have it priced by an expert.
I went to the pawn shop yesterday, and it turns out that old vase I found at the thrift store is really valuable.
Why would an old vase be valuable?
I actually learned that it's not really a vase. It's an antique milk bottle.
But I thought you only collected flower vases.
That's true, but this piece is so cool that I'm going to make an exception.
You could even start collecting all kinds of glass vessels, not just vases.
I finally got Gary trained on the insertion machine today. He was very grateful for all my training.
I had Gary tell me he was using it incorrectly.
Yeah, he was. Now he's a lot more efficient and skilled at using it. I'm glad I could help him.
That was very nice of him to be thankful for the help.
He was, he offered to take me to lunch too!
Well, that was nice of him, Sasha! Take him up on it.
Its fun showing people how to work the machine.
Yeah, teaching feels great.
It does, nothing like that feeling.
I agree.
I saw one of my employees was having a lot of trouble with that new machine.
I heard it's not the easiest thing in the world to work with.
I showed them how to operate the machine properly.
Did that help them?
Yes, it made it way easier for them.
I just married a new wife.
Why? Have you divorced your first wife?
No, am still married to her, but I married another one .
You are brave dude.
Yeah, I'm a man.
Alright, it's your wish.
I love my wife so much, but I have this other woman I love too.
So what are you considering?
I married her.
Oh! How is your first wife coping with that?
I stay with her and rented have a apartment for the other wife>
Interesting.
This new job is really taking up all my time.
Did you leave work late?
Yes, and that made me late for my martial arts lessons.
Is your dojo far from your work?
It's way across on the other side of town.
Sounds like you need a new job or a new dojo.
I feel really bad when I am late for things
What were you late for?
I almost missed my martial arts lesson. I had to get to the Dojo which was on the other side of town.
That is a long way away, it must have taken forever!
Yeah I was really late.
Maybe you'll go early next time.
I had to try every key to try to open the door.
Did you finally get the door open?
No. I wasn't able to get the right combination.
So what did you do?
I just called a locksmith.
I would have thought a hacker would be more appropriate for an electronic keypad.
This key isn't the right one. I'll have to try another one.
How many keys have you tried?
I've tried a few, but there are still a few I haven't tried.
I really hope you have the key.
Well I've tried them all and I can't get the door unlocked.
Here let me try. Sometimes you have to wiggle it to get it to work.
I had to get back at Jordan.
Did you finally get him for that practical joke he played on us?
I did, it was so funny he was surprised.
How did you get back at him?
Well I hid in his room and scared him.
Tell me more about it, tell me about his face and his actions in that moment.
I fell off my bike today, and it wasn't even my fault.
How was it not your fault if you fell off your bike?
There was a car coming the wrong side of the road, and I had to pull Skylar closer to me so the car didn't hit her.
Oh, so when you pulled her closer you guys both fell?
Yes, we just lost our balance, but at least no one got hit by a car.
That is very true. You are a hero in a way.
Who ever invented surprise birthday parties is a jerk.
Who was foolish enough to throw you a surprise birthday party?
Riley, at work. I know he meant well and is the office party planner, but I still hate them.
You have to know they are coming, it is your birthday.
Yeah, but when some one forces you into a room so people can yell surprise at you and scares you half to death, its just not fun.
Well next year call in sick, then you can avoid the whole thing and enjoy your day in peace.
I was wondering why Riley was being so pushy today.
What do you mean by pushy?
He kept trying me to go into this room, I started getting nervous.
So what happened in the room?
It was a party, everyone yelled surprise, I wasn't expecting it.
Seems like the surprise worked.
Man it is still hot in here even with the fan on.
Yeh it is, think about how hot it's going to be next week with the heatwave headed our way!
We need to get a new fan, this one is a hundred years old and  isn't going to keep us alive next week!
I agree, look at this one, it is on sale online and can be here this week!
Perfect! I've it ordered it and on it's way!
Yay one more giant step towards surviving another heatwave! We got this!
Finally made it down to the appliance store today.
What did you need there?
I got a new window fan, my old one had gotten so weak it barely moved the air around.
Good thing, the news said there is a heatwave coming tomorrow.
That's exactly why I bought it, my old one would be too ineffective to keep my room cool during that.
Well, if you're not going to buy an air conditioner, a good window fan is the way to go in a heat wave.
Bit by bit, it gets a little better. My vision improves a bit more every day.
That's so wonderful. It must be a little overwhelming seeing so many new things.
It is. But it's a great feeling, more than anything.
Make sure you take it slow, though. Don't overdo it.
I won't. Oh, and I saw the bakery today. It was so great!
Nothing like seeing it with your very own eyes, what can beat that?
You wouldn't believe how great my eyes feel after the surgery.
I'm glad everything went well. What was the first place you went to after you left the doctor's office?
I had to go to the bakery and look at all the sweet foods. I think I deserve some fun after three whole months of recuperating.
I don't disagree, but you should have saved me some bakery food!
Those cakes look amazing!
Glad you can finally see!
I thought I never would again.
What are you going to do now?
I'm going to eat a cake!
Must be nice to be able to see it!
I hope Addison isn't worries about me.
She had mentioned that she thinks of you often and that she still hasn't come to terms with you moving out.
That is upsetting, I had to move for school, I didn't mean to make her sad.
Addison is just grieving severely, you are still in her heart and mind daily.
Maybe I should come back and visit her.
That would be a good idea.
I'm having a very hard time today
Tell me what is on your mind?
I am thinking about my friend, Addison, she always worries so much about me.
Addison did say that you are in her heart and mind daily.
She acts like I died, I just moved house!
She is probably just grieving.
I love the Kai family.
The family is just amazing and loved by everyone.
I need to do something for them to show my appreciation.
If you need any help let me know because I can give you some ideas.
Can we meet up so we can talk about it?
I'll give you a call when I'm free this week.
I love Kai's family! I really feel like they treat me like one of their own.
I think they like you too, you just fit right in.
I'm glad that I do, in my family I have always felt like the odd one out.
So I bet it's nice to feel like you fit in finally?
Exactly! I'm so grateful for it.
I am sure the Kai family is happy to have you around.
I just love going over and spending time with the Kai family.
I am sure they really like it when you come over.
They have always treated me like family.
What do you get up to when you visit?
Everything and anything, we eat a lot too!
Sounds great!
I was walking home and I went down the wrong way when a mob cornered me.
Oh my, I know how dangerous the way home can be.
Yeah, so I had to pull out my knife to defend myself.
Did that scare away anyone in the mob?
They were wary of me after that and they did not escalate the situation.
I'm glad you got out of there without needing to fight anyone.
I used a knife to defend myself.
Yea you got to stay away from the bad people.
They started walking away after that.
Have you considered to move out of the city?
I plan on doing that.
Good on you for that.
I can't believe I left the wallet at home.
Are you going to go back?
I already went back once to get the purse, but I forgot the wallet.
Can you stay without the wallet?
No, I can't.
Then you have to go back.
My wife and I went to the store.
Are you shopping for the holidays already?
Not really. Actually we didn't get to buy anything
What happened?
My wife was asking me for her wallet but obviously it was left in the house.
That's too bad. You can try again another day.
My friend asked me to grab her purse but when we got to the store, she realized her wallet wasn't in it.
What did you do?
We walked home to get it.  I had taken it out earlier and didn't put it back in her purse.
Were you close to her house?
We were a couple of blocks away.
That was not far.
Kai's daughter was so happy.
That's good. Kai is such a good mom.
Yes, she is.
I never bought my kids a car.
Do you like the new car we got you?
Is this for my sixteenth birthday?
No, this is for working so hard this year and making the honour###'#0-po[== roll every quarter
I love you. I am so happy I have great parents
we are happy to have you as a daughter too
Did you get a car?
Yes, well think of it as a bit of a graduation present
Thank you so much!
You deserve it, you have been working so hard
I have been wanting this car since I was a kid
Well, you have it now!
I was drifting through life before the baby.
Did a baby give your life that much added meaning?
Yeah, it seemed like there wasn't a point to anything before.
Didn't you have so many interests before?
Yeah, but that did not make my life so meaningful.
I see but I don't think I understand your point at all.
Would you like to go out to celebrate tonight?
I suppose the presentation went well.
It went even better than I had hoped for, spending every night on it this week really paid off.
So the buyers are interested in your company?
My boss told me that the buyers are placing their largest order ever with our company.
We have to celebrate then!
I have been working so hard this week.
Did you take any days off?
No, the presentation is a big one and needs to be perfect.
I'm sure you will do great.
I am so nervous, I hope it goes well.
Good luck, let me know how it goes.
I am so glad it is Friday.
How did the big presentation at your job go?
Well, I prepared for it all week and finally was able to pitch my idea today.
And?
My boss said it was very innovative but may be too advanced for what the company is trying to achieve.
That is unfortunate. Hold on to the idea though. It is a good one.
I prepared all week for this presentation at work but I am still very nervous about it.
I am sure you will do fine on Friday.
I wish I could be as confident as you are.
You know you prepared well, so no need to worry.
Will you be there to give me the boost?
I sure wish I could be, but then I have to be at work myself.
I just finished the presentation. I am really glad it's Friday.
Are you looking forward to the weekend?
Yes but mostly I worked so hard this week I just want to rest and relax.
Did the presentation go well?
I think it did. my boss was happy with it.
Then you did a good job so you deserve a relaxing weekend!
So you got the job, huh? Starting tomorrow?
Yes, I did. Thanks so much, I can't tell you how thankful I am.
I'm happy to have helped. It's because of your effort.
And I'm glad to have had a friend along the way.
I finally got Jesse the job he wanted.
How did you manage that?
It was more of his effort than mine, he went to all of the interviews I told him to and he got lucky.
Do you think he is happy with the job he got?
Yeah because he told me this specific job is what he had went to school for.
That is good, I hope he will succeed.
Taylor drove me to the middle of the desert and said he was going to leave me there
Why did he wanted to do something like that?
Because he thought I told his parents that he flunked Chemistry.
Even if you had, that was a pretty drastic reaction.  How did you convince him not to leave you there.
I told him that if he left me I would either die there or tell his parents what he did.  And then he'd be in even more trouble.
It sounds like he did not think that through in advance.
Isn't this the cutest top?
You already bought like 3 new shirts.
I know, but this is so cute!
I thought you were going to try not to spend so much money on non essentials.
I know. I'll only buy these shoes, and this shirt, and then I'm done.
Sure Robin. Good luck with that.
I spent way too much money shopping at the mall today
What did you buy there?
Clothes and shoes mostly. But I was on the budget, so this was really bad.
If you are on a budget why didn't you stick to it?
Everything was on sale and clearance and sales like this are so rare.
Your budget is shattered. You usually cannot return clearance items.
I had Courtney, Dave, Eric, Alice, Ben, and Steve over yesterday.
That's nice. What did you guys do?
Just talked about the upcoming game. You were working at the time.
Oh yeah, so what's going on with that?
We're going to Philip's house to watch the game and have some food. There should be lots of people there.
Sounds like fun. Count me in!
I yelled at my friends to come over.  We held a meeting on the field about the upcoming game.
What was the upcoming game?
We were organizing a football game with the all of our friends who play.  We want to raise money for the homeless.
That sounds great.
We have to know who can play and if they have friends they can bring who also play.
It's good thing and you are doing well.
Hey we should talk soon.
Yeah, I am heading over now for the meet.
We have to talk about the upcoming game.
We will talk when I get there.
I called everyone over.
I see so everyone should be there first.
I didn't want to go because I thought I would be surrounded by a bunch of old people.
Who was at the party?
Lots of our friends were there. I'm glad I went.
Did you mom rub you having a good time in your face?
No, he didn't say too much.
Cool. So, who all did you see there?
Hey Sydney, I was thinking about you the other day when I saw you after class.
Oh, I was really busy and I had tennis practice that day.
Oh, well I was going to see if you would like to go out on a date this weekend?
I'm not really interested in being more than friends.
Okay, I understand, but if you want to hang out, we can do that after class sometime too.
Alright, perhaps later on when I am not as busy.
What happened to the food and drinks that I prepared?
Sorry, I didn't know it was yours.
What do you mean?
I ate the food and fruit drinks.
Well, I guess I need to prepare the meal again for me. Don't eat it this time.
I promise that I will not eat your food.
Jesse is so greedy.
Why would you say she is greedy?
She ate all my food.
Maybe she was really hungry.
She also drank all my fruit drinks.
That's over the line.
My brother did it to me again.
What did Jesse do this time?
He ate the food I was going to have for dinner before I could even get home from work.
That was rude since you always pay for everything.
I couldn't even get a cold drink because he finished the fruit punch and apple juice too.
I think you are going to have to talk to him about this since it keeps happening.
Jessie ate my lunch today.
Did he know it was your lunch?
He did. And he drank all of my juices.
Why would he do that?
He said he was getting back at me for forgetting to bring his lunch.
That's bad. Don't offer to pick his up ever again.
I just got my hair cut, I really like it.
Oh yeah how did you have it cut?
It's a Mohawk
A mohawk!? That's a bold choice.
Well I'm a bold person.
Haha, you sure are.
What do you think about my project?
It looks great. How do you come up with this idea?
I actually ignored my colleagues and instead, asked a stranger off the street.
Interesting. Was the stranger helpful?
Yes. The suggestion helped improve my project.
Glad to hear that.
My colleagues and I were headed back from lunch and we were arguing about a slogan idea for the Smithers on campaign, so I just stopped a guy on the street and asked him!
Were you able to get any good insights from the guy you asked.
Absolutely.  My co-workers thought I was crazy, but asking someone who has no preconceived notions is the best way to get good direction.
So did he agree with you?
Actually, no.  I didn't like the slogan but the guy I asked really did.  So I admitted to my co-workers that I was wrong.
Good for you!  I know it's hard to admit when you're wrong.
The authorities wanted an explanation about the situation with Carlson.
Oh, what did you do?
I took them to Carlson's house and he answered the door.
What happened next, did Carlson get upset?
Yea a little but still who better to explain the situation then Carlson himself.
I would have done the same, I hate being questioned about situations that involve someone besides myself.
I swear we weren't doing anything
Let me talk Rob
Fine
Listen officers, we didn't know this area was off limits
Yea there wasn't a sign or anything
Yes, that is what happened
Things got really hairy tonight.
What was going on?
Carson and I were caught by the authorities.
Did anything go wrong?
No, I let Carson explain the situation so the authorities could understand what was going on.
Carson does have a way with words.
I feel so stupid right now man!
What! why do you say that
I always thought that Jan's dog has been ripping my garden apart for years. I was so wrong
How did you establish the truth Jesse?
I found a family of foxes digging into my lawn.
Oh dear! you should find a way of apologizing to Jan
I hated Jan's dog with a passion.
How can you hate a dog?
The dog was always using the carpet as a bathroom.
Maybe it was sick.
I feel guilty. I found out later that Jan lied to me and never walked that dog outside.
Wow, she should never be allowed to own a dog again.
You need to calm down.
Calm down? Get out of my way.
You should get some rest.
You get some rest too, my friend.
Sydney really seemed unhappy yesterday.
I heard she gave everyone grief.
She even gave me grief.
That's out of character for her.
Yeah, she's usually mousy, and I'm the only person who tries to be friendly with her.
I heard a relative of hers died.
Hey, did you hear? I got a painting job.
What, like a portrait?
No, of course not! Like, house painting. Painting the inside walls.
Oh, cool, I guess. How did it go?
Really good! I'm totally proud. I think I did a really good job.
Cool. If you want more work, my aunt is looking for someone to do her apartment.
I turned my mom's necklaces into hundreds of dollars.
How? Who would want used jewellery?
I turned the jewellery into gold and sold the gold.
Ah. You're going to be rich.
I'm really have a good time working as a jeweller part time.
That's actually good to hear.
Yeah, I think I'm really good at it. I just transmuted my mother's jewellery into gold,
I bet she's going to really love that as a gift.
That's actually a good idea.
Can you turn some of my toy jewellery into something valuable?
In honour of my mother, I transmuted her jewellery into gold.
I bet they looked really nice.
They did and it was super easy since I work at the jewellers part time.
That was certainly a perk.
They let me use the equipment and helped along the way.
I can't wait to see the finished product.
It was such a weird scene for the movie. Remy wanted me to sit in a chair and have duct tape on my wrists.
Sounds like a really scary movie you guys are making.
It is. But I'm glad to have a role in it.
Do you think it's going to be a good movie?
I have no idea. But at least I'm getting paid for it.
I'm actually excited to watch it.
It so dark under here.
I see why are you holding your breath?
Because I'm playing hide and seek with my sibling and don't want to get caught.
Yea, I hold my breath too when someone comes in.
Yeah same it's smart so they don't hear you.
Yeah that's right.
My brother and I were playing his and seek this morning.
That sounded like it must have been fun.
Yeah when he came into the room I was so scared that I held my breath.
Did he find you?
Yeah, I accidentally fell one of the dogs squeaky toys!
I was playing hide and seek with my brother, and I had the best hiding spot!
That sounds fun! Where were you hiding?
I was under the bed in the guest bedroom. He never even found me.
That's a good place to hide.
He came in there, but I held my breath, and he didn't even know I was there.
That's smart! I never would have thought to hold my breath.
I'm so tired from work today. I can't wait to go home.
I feel you. Trying to finish up those reports wiped me out
I know. I thought we would never get them done
Hopefully tomorrow will be more relaxed
I think we got enough done today so it will be
I sure hope so.
Hey I know we had plans, but I am not sure I can go now.
No, come on man, what about the bar?
I had such a long day, I really need to go home.
It's a shame.
I know but I am very tired.
No problem.
I feel really disappointed to know that we can't take the exam
well at least we will be ready for it in two years I guess
better to be prepared than not I guess
would you like to get something to eat then while we wait for it to be over?
sure, sounds like a great idea to me
I can't believe I spent all this time studying and can't even take the test.
Why wouldn't they let you take the test?
I am too young.
I see. When will you be able to take the test then?
I can take it 2 years from now, but by then I will have forgotten all the stuff I studied recently.
That is a shame, but maybe you will remember a lot of it since you studied so hard.
I've been studying for this exam all week.
Is that the big end of year exam for that big internship?
Yes it is. I really want to win.
I thought you were too young to win. Did you check the guidelines?
Oh My God! I am too young. All this time wasted studying.
Ha! better luck next year Austin.
This sucks
What happened?
I was not eligible for the exam I studied for.
You studied for weeks!
I was 2 years too young to do it
I guess you need to wait
Cameron is a good person. I am his banker!
I learnt Cameron is so rich!
Yes, she is and I am doing a good job by managing Cameron's money effectively.
I trust you to be a good banker.
Cameron is going to be very happy with her investments.
You're lucky she's your client.
I have to manage her money wisely, there's a lot of it.
Now she can spread the word and you can get more banking clients.
I'm really feeling good about joining the new gym and getting into shape
we can work out together if you want and I can motivate you
that sounds like an awesome idea and I think that would work
just call me when you are going to go so I can get ready
sounds good
I just enrolled in a new gym.
It's always good to get exercise.
It's right near my work.
That sounds convenient.
I hope I can lose some weight.
Why? You already look great.
Have you noticed anything new with me lately?
Yes, you seem to have lost a little bit of weight
Absolutely. I enrolled for some gym classes near where I work
It seems to be working for you Sasha
Indeed. It's time I got serious about my health
I should think about working out too
I have a lot to think about. My doctor has given me so many choices.
What do you mean?
He gave me lots of information to read so that I can decide what to do about my tumor.
My advice is to read through the material carefully and choose wisely.
Yeah, I am considering having it removed
My doctor just told me the bad news.  He discovered a tumor in me.
I am so sorry to hear that.  What are you going to do?
I don't know yet.  I made an appointment to come in and talk with him about my options.
I hope it's not cancerous.
That would be the best scenario.  I am feeling scared.
I'm here if you need to talk.
I think I hit a record number of 3 pointers today!
how many did you make?
I made 12 total, which is crazy
wow that is lot of 3's, congrats!
we even upset the top seed with my performance
wow I am really happy for you!
The Scout was in the audience and Taylor was angry!
You killed it tonight! 12 three pointers. I know you going to get picked.
I can't believe I won, over the top player.
The Scout is coming over to you right?
All that work I've been doing in training certainly is starting to pay off.  I tied with Sydney in today's race.
Congratulations!
Sydney has been the one to gauge my progress against, he is so fast.
I'm sure he was surprised to see you right alongside him as you crossed the finish line.
I just have to keep up with my regimen and maybe I can get ahead of him in the next race.
I have no doubt that you will be winning races soon.
The text was a bit difficult, nonetheless I finished.
Did you read for it?
Yes, I did.
Okay, how did it go?
I made sure I answered the questions given correctly.
That's nice.
Well, that test I was worried about wasn't as bad as I thought it would be!
Oh, right, today was test day! How did you do?
I think I did okay. I actually finished early!
Nice! It must have been an easy test!
It was! I even had time to double check my answers before turning it in.
Great! I'm sure you'll ace it!
I took the test today.
You did?  How'd it go?
I got through the questions faster than I thought.  I felt pretty confident.
That's good.  Did you have time left?
I did.  I was able to go through the questions to make sure of my answers.
Oh nice.  I hope you score well!  You worked hard to prepare for that test.
I ended up going across town during rush hour.
Yikes! Not the best time to go.
No. The worst time to go. It took 3 hours to go someplace I should have taken 30 minutes.
Why didn't you just give up and try a different time?
Because the item I had to pick up was time-sensitive.
Did that three hour delay affect it at all?
I went somewhere during rush hour.
Did you stuck in traffic?
Yes I did
I will never do that again.
I understand
That was so stressful
I'm going to clean all of the bedrooms to get the house ready for the big weekend party.
A party? How come I wasn't invited?
My whole family is throwing the party. It's only for relatives. That's why we're trying to make everything look neat and organized.
In that case, good luck tidying up the house.
I had a party with the family over the weekend.
That sounds fun. Did you had a good time?
It was fun, the food was amazing.
What did you eat?
Mostly American food. But the cleaning was tedious. I helped clean.
Glad to hear you had fun.
Did you get your grades yet?
Yeah. I got what I was expecting.  How about you?
Well, you may recall that last semester I was devastated when my report card was awash in C's. Not this semester!
I know you have been working hard this semester to bring your grades up. What is the result?
Not a single C!  I have clawed my way out of the pit, and I am never going back!
I'm proud of you!
I am really scared in your yard, Ash.
Why is that Lee?
I keep looking around in fear of dangerous animals.
Oh, good point. Lots of those around here!
That is why I could never live here.
The car dealership was so slow today
I hope you made some sort of quota
Yeah some customers came in eventually
a slow start is okay as long as it picks up
Thankfully it was great later on
dragging days are never fun
Hey so it was not too busy at work today, mom.
That's probably a good first day, to take it nice and slow.
But the good news is, I made a few sales!
Wow, I always knew you were a salesperson underneath.
Yes, I sold three cars and it was pretty fun doing it.
You are off to a fantastic start at the car dealership!
I hope every day at the dealership isn't as slow as it was today. I'll lose my mind.
Pretty dead, huh? They probably don't expect to make any sales on your first day, do they?
They ALWAYS expect you to make sales. And I actually did make a sale -- to three different customers.
Oh, wow. Then I'd say that's a good result for a slow day. A great result, even.
It is. Don't get me wrong, I'm not complaining about that part of it.
I hope not. I mean, why would you complain about a healthy commission on your first day of work?
My sister had another kid.
I heard she was pregnant.
She just came home from the hospital.
Were you there to greet her?
Oh yes and she let me hold the baby.
Please give them my best.
Guess what? I held my nephew today. For the first time!
That's great, your sister finally had her baby, huh?
Yes! And he's so cute.
Haha, nieces and nephews are the best.
My sister just had a baby at the hospital and it looked so cute
I heard about that, did they have a boy?
Yes, they named him James and he looked so cute when I held him in my hands
aww he sounds like such a nice baby
you can visit next time we go up there
I want to go on a date with Kendall.
Nice, did you tell her?
Yeah, we had a talk this week.
So, what did she say?
We have a date Tuesday!
Congratulations, she's amazing!
Hey, would you want to meet me for coffee sometime?
Oh, I don't drink coffee. How about lunch?
Sure. I know a great place you should try.
When are you free?
How about Friday?
Ok, I'm free Friday too.
Kendall, we've known each other for a few years right?
Yeah so?
Well, we are always hanging out, so I was thinking.
Well, spit it out , Kai
I think you and I should have a more serious relationship. Like start dating.
Ha!! But Kai, you know I am sleeping with your brother, Kyle.
My car broke down and I missed the bus so I didn't have a way to get to work.
What did you do?
I called Sydney and her brother picked me up and took me.
That was really nice of her, her brother doesn't work though?
He works from home so it wasn't a big deal.
That is cool
I'm really glad Jesse found a way for me to get to work.
I had no idea you had trouble getting to work.
My care is not working at the moment so I had to go to work another way.
What did she do for you?
She found out all the bus schedules and told me which ones to take.
That is really nice of her.
I almost didn't make it into work today.
Because of the thunder storm last night, there was a lot of damage around the city today.
Exactly why, a big branch fell through my car's windshield during the night and I didn't find it till this morning.
That was bad, did someone come to fix it?
Yes, they were sending a replacement service.  Fortunately my neighbour Sydney was home, so he is going wait for the service man, and loaned me his car for the day.
What a great neighbour, wish I had a nice neighbour like that.
I had a painting in the auction this weekend. Did you go?
I couldn't make it. Was Riley running it this time?
Yeah, she sold my painting for top dollar to one of her regular bidders.
That's really awesome! You're art is worth a pretty penny in my opinion, but I could be biased.
You're too kind. I do have a big boost to my confidence knowing people really like my work so much.
Of course they do! I've been telling you your work is amazing for years!
I got the money I needed from this painting this weekend.
I heard the great news about what Riley did for you.
Oh yeah, definitely was a huge helping me getting this sold.
Are you going to use on the sell other paintings in the future.
It seems like I have no choice because this is such a good transaction.
Once you find something that works, stick with it.
Riley sold my painting for lot of money to the highest bidder this weekend at auction.
That's great.  You made a lot of profit.
Riley took a cut but I still made out okay.
You are so creative.  What new works are you painting now?
I have a couple of paintings that are in progress.  I want to finish them before the end of the year.
I want to check out the finished art pieces.
I am so happy that Riley was on my team for the sale of my painting.
So it was Riley who found someone to buy the painting?
Yes, she sold it at the weekend auction for a lot of money.
That is great. Does Riley get a commission on the sale?
She certainly earned a commission.
Yeah. She must be an awesome salesperson to have sold it in the first weekend.
My mom said she saw you yesterday.
Yes, I was at the mall.
She was impressed that you came over and said hello.
I like your mom.
I know, but a lot of kids just ignore other kids' parents.
I guess I'm not like that.
I just don't seem to be able to grasp it.
I will sit with you and we can go over it.
The study guide just confuses me.
Let me show you how to lay it all out.
That is making a lot more sense now.
See, if you just break it down you can then piece it all together.
Kendall is a lifesaver. I read the study guide several times and I still didn't understand it.
Did Kendall help you?
Yes, she explained everything in layman's terms for me to understand. I finally did.
She's really nice. She wants to be a teacher, too.
Yes, she makes difficult things seem really easy. I owe her.
Thanks for teaching me how to do this. I was having so much trouble and had no idea how I was going to figure it out.
Yeah, it was a bit tricky for me at first too. I am glad I could help you out with that.
It really was so much easier with your help.
I am glad I made it easier to understand. I am sure you will do great on the test.
Thanks! I sure hope so I have spent a lot of time studying.
Hey, you know what they say 'Practice makes perfect!'.
I've been studying for an upcoming test in my history class.
I wish you the best of luck on that. Have you got a solid grasp of the material?
One of my classmates compiled information from the lecture notes and created a study guide. At first I didn't understand that information.
In that case there is no shame in asking for help.
That's what I did. I asked Kendall for help and he agreed to teach me this information. Now I feel like I better understand it.
That was the right course of action. Good luck on your test!
So this is the right thing to do to get a puppy. You'll love it.
But I feel like we are inheriting someone else's problem.
No, these pups are just looking for love. Let's check them out.
Okay, I will give a try otherwise its back to the Pet Shop.
Okay, did you find anything you like?
Yes, thanks Alex. I think I want that one. It was staring at me right in the eyes. It spoke to me. I love his name too!! Here Cujo!!
I took Addison to the animal shelter next to the salon to look at the new dogs.
Do they get new dogs all the time?
I think they get them more often now.  A lot of people have lot their jobs and can't afford to keep their dogs.
Shelters have been the only place I go adopt my dogs.
You have three dogs right?
That's right. They are my babies.
We are going to have a blast tomorrow.
What plans have you made?
I'm going to the park. The kids are coming along.
That sounds like it is going to be a load of fun.
I know, I wish you too could join us.
Too bad I will be out of town.
It is such a beautiful day outside, how about we all go for a walk?
I guess we could, but I would rather play video games.
How about a walk to the park then, you can play games outside there!
I guess so, when will we leave?
Well right now of course! The park closes in a few hours!
Ok, lets go now!
I was able to get the kids out of the house yesterday!
How did you end up getting them off the game system?
I told them that if they went to the park with me, I would give them 20.00 each..
So you bribed them?
It worked and they ended up having a great time playing at the park.
Kids need to have fresh air.
we Are only able to hire so many people.  I think that you are an awesome person though and that overall it is a great way to go
Right.  I don't know if I will be employed by you guys or not, but I know for a fact that this role is for me
Yeah, there are only two spots that can be filled so essentially we are going to have to let go 8 people
That is understandable
yeah hopefully we wont let you go, but there is a possibility
thanks for letting me know
I cant believe you found my leather back that was missing for a month
it was under the dog's bead and I think he hid it from you
well, here's some money and i bought you  a puzzle i know that you love
you're such an amazing person I swear
Jordan found my leather backpack!
Oh great, you love that thing.
I gave him some cash and also bought him a puzzle gift.
That's generous of you. Why the puzzle?
It's about a detective so I thought it was cute because he searched out the backpack.
I get it and it is cute!
I lost my leather back the other day and I was so bummed out.
That really stinks? Did you ever find it again?
Actually this nice guy, Jordan, found it and returned it to me.
That's awesome! Did you tell him thanks?
I actually got him a puzzle and gave him 10 bucks.
That was a nice thing to do for him.
But Addison, I'm telling you that my guess about the stock market crashing in a year are correct?
Oh, I know you're confident - but can you actually prove it?
Okay, fine; what if I were to put my money where my mouth is by trading the stock market in an experiment?
Well, if you're willing to go that far, then I'll follow your stock trades and put up 50 centers for every dollar you bet.
Alright then, I'll put $1000 up for the experiment and short the stock indexes; you're not going to back down from the experiment, now, are you?
You're on - I'll put up $500 for your stock market experiment!
I hope this shows you just exactly what i was trying to explain
I just don't understand how a car can go back in time
well, you need to go about eighty miles an hour and you need electricity to hit the loop
i guess that would make sense in a movie but not in real life
I am buying some new shoes.
Finally, what kind?
I don't know yet, I just got to the store.
Buy ones that aren't going to break after a few wears.
I will keep the look out for some.
I got a whole on the bottom of my shoe.
So you are soulless.
Whatever. I got to buy a new pair.
How will a pear give you soul?
Ouch, there's a hole in the sole of my shoe!
Looks like it's time to get a new pair.
Yeah, I've had these too long.
Are there any that you're interested in?
I'm not sure, I haven't been paying attention to shoes lately.
Let's go look around in the store.
I was overwhelmed with work and the kids wanted to go to the zoo.
How did you resolve that situation?
I asked Kai to take the kids to the zoo.
That was very nice of him.
They all had a great time.
I am happy it all worked out.
I'm glad that I have the ability to get inside of peoples hands and make them see something that I want them to.
It's a dangerous power but I love the fact that you have it.
It has gotten us a lot of the things that we have here at work to this point.
Without these things there's no telling where would be today.
Exactly, you have to use every ability that you have to make it to the top.
If that's not the truth, I don't know what it is.
I've never been on a train before, so I thought it would be fun.
Isn't it going to take you a lot longer to get there?
If I drove it wouldn't take as long to get there, but then I'd be driving the whole time.
I've been on a train a few times- it's fun the first time but then the novelty wore off.
Well I've got a seat next to the window and they serve food so I think it will be great.
Have a great trip!
I've got a trip coming up to Middletown.
How are you getting there?
I was considering the train.  I've never been on one.
You should do it--they're fun.
Well, that settles it.  I'm going to buy a ticket.
I think you'll have a good time.
Guess what I finally bought today?
I don't know, what? I can't think of anything you've mentioned lately.
Instead of taking a plane for my trip...I bought a train ticket instead.
That sounds like fun. I've never been on a train before. A subway but not a passenger train.
Same here. I think it might be fun. A little trip of its own.
You're probably right. I wish I was going with you.
Those survey results were shocking.
Yeah, I had no idea that would be how people felt.
Agreed, I'm going to keep them in mind when thinking about the project.
That's a  good idea.
Yeah, that how I use the new data the best.
That's right.
I've spent so much time studying this survey. I hope it helps me on the subject.
The instructions said that the survey will give you all the information you need.
I just have to figure out how the survey relates to the subject.
If you need any help, just ask!
Hey, can I borrow a ten spot?
Again?  That's the third time this week!
I've got to pay back Kendall.  I had a bad night at the casino.
Not again!  You got to stop going there!  And don't you owe Cindy a bunch of money too?
That's why I had to get money from Kendall last night.  Cindy was last week.
Yeah, and so was I, and Lucas, and the janitor from Speedy Burger!  What was his name, and why does he give money away to girls he does not even know?  an, you need help!
I went to the casino yesterday with $100 and lost it all.
What game did you play?
Blackjack but it wasn't my money.
What are you doing to do?
No idea. Do you have any suggestions?
I can give you some pointers for next time.
I know if I keep playing I can win my money back.
Maybe you should just quit.
Just borrow me the money and I will put it all on red.
OK but if you lose you better pay me.
I am sorry I lost all your money.
You owe me and you should stop gambling.
I had to have a bunch of candidates wait outside while we made a decision on who to hire.
Yikes. Did you have a large turnout?
Yes. We were at the in person interview stage, so we had them wait outside so we could make a decision on the spot.
Got it. You must have had a lot of good candidates.
We did. It was really difficult to make a decision.
Well, I'm sure you guys made the right choice.
I'm conducting interviews with potential employees today.
How many candidates are there?
We're doing ten interviews and want to have our selection narrowed to three by the end of the day.
Are you dismissing the candidates after the interview and calling them with your decision?
No, we're going to ask them to wait outside while we debate our choice.
I hope you find the employees you're looking for!
I was holding interviews for a job.
I need all them to wait outside to come to a decision.
It's going to be tough.
Just give a commercial about what to do.
Again, we need to put our best foot forward.
I interviewed 3 job candidates today. One of the guys was eliminated almost immediately.
Why was that? Did he do something stupid like passing gas during the interview?
How did you know?! Just kidding. He maintained very little eye contact and sounded completely disinterested in the position.
So how did you choose the winner? Did you do what we usually do in a situation like that?
Since both applicants were equally qualified, yes, I flipped a coin. Job Candidate B was hired!
It sure does make life easier being able to flip a coin sometimes to make a decision.
I dropped my phone on the pavement.  I thought I had broken it and picked it up immediately.
Did you break it?
Luckily it wasn't broken.  It has a tiny scratch on the case but not a big deal.
That's good to hear.  I broke my phone last week after I dropped it.  The screen just shattered.
That's tragic.  Is this your expensive phone you recently bought?
Yes it is, and I don't have insurance on it.
Man I love video games but I need to find a way to make myself take a break.
Yea I love games too but just put it down so that I can focus on other things.
That is what I need to do, I just need to take the first step in doing that.
Yea it was hard at first but it got better and easier the more I did it.
I'm really trying not to play video games today.
Why can't you play video games.
I think I'm too addicted to it. I'm trying to reduce playing it.
So how are you going to do that?
I'm going to hang out with you since you don't like video games.
I guess that's a good way to help yourself.
I need to come back playing these games.
It seems like that's all you do after work.
Lately that's been true.
How are you going to come back?
I have to take the systems out of here.
Do you want me to hold them for you?
I would love to play a video game with you but I have to decline today
Why, what's going on?
I have a serious video game addiction and really want to cure that so I'm trying to not play as often
Oh I see, my brother has that addiction too so he got a second job to occupy more of his time
That's actually a great idea! Did it work for your brother
Of course, he flat out didn't have the time to play and starting realizing his financial situation was better as well
What are you wearing to the wedding? I've been sitting here for an hour and can't decide between the black suit and the white suit!
I'm wearing the purple dress I told you about.
I'm leaning towards the black suit because it fits better.
Yea, the black suit would be my choice too.
But then, the white suit would be more of a statement.
That's true too. Tough decision!
I don't know what to wear to the wedding. Why can't it just be a normal formal wedding. Casual is more difficult.
I'm sure you will pick outa decent outfit. Nobody will be staring at you .
How about  the blue shirt with those grey pants?
That's looks great.
Or maybe the yellow shirt and a pair of jeans?
there are a lot of dresses to choose from.  I am glad you know which ones you truly like the most and all
yeah I'm so happy I was able to watch you decide on how to pick a dress
oh of course.  it is not the easiest process in the world and it holds value to me
of course.  I know how much it means to you
yeah for sure. thanks for being a good friend
you're welcome
I am thankful to Quinn for getting me interested in reading.
How long ago was that?
Quinn turned me on to reading about three years ago.
You've collected a lot of books in three years.
I know I have. It can get expensive but I love it.
I need a hobby that doesn't costs as much as buying books.
I became successful because of Bailey.
How so?
She developed my love of reading really early and then when I was older, she showed me how to analyse books.
And that's what got you writing?
It's what helped me understand plot and stuff.
Well you have to dedicate a book to her!
I just wanted to thank you for always buying me books when i was younger
I knew you loved to read and bought you my favourites that I liked when i was that age
I think you really motivated me to write and I wouldn't be where I'm at and a famous author if it wasn't for you
it's no problem really. i would have done it for any family member i had
There's been so much tragedy and confusion lately.
Your speech was great.
Kendall said I expressed their feelings about everything.
I think you expressed everyone's feelings.
Kendall really felt like he was treated unfairly.
Well I deserved the promotion!
But think of everything Kendall had to go through!
Just because he was in a fire doesn't mean he deserves a promotion.
But he saved all of our lives by putting it out!
Yes, you do have a point.
Kendall has been stabilized.  She said to thank you all, but she needs her rest.
I'm glad to hear that she is okay.
Well, she is, but her life is never going to be the same.
Yeah, it must be awful to have been in a fatal car crash.
She will have a long road ahead of her.
We will keep her in our prayers.
I am so proud of Addison's work. Did you hear the news?
Not yet, Sasha. What is it?
Addison has been applying to all the jobs I was telling her about and finally got a call back.
That's great for her! What's the job offer?
It's a high paying job at the local newspaper
That would be great for Addison!
I ran into Addison again today.
She is the one you've been trying to help right?
Yeah, I had been trying my best to help her land a nice job.
Had been?
Well today all the hard work finally paid off and she starts a nice new high paying job tomorrow!
Wow, that's a really nice thing you did.
I'm glad, Addison, that you were able to land a good paying job through my contacts.
Thanks to your reference and your contacts, I'm pretty much set.
You're welcome. You were a great employee and I will miss you.
We can still get together. I still live right around the corner.
I'll miss you at work, but you deserve a position you can move up in.
We need to celebrate tonight and grab a couple drinks somewhere.
I finally helped Addison get a job. I sent her on a bunch of interviews and one of the places hired her.
That's wonderful. Do you get a commission?
Yes, but the best part is her job is a high paying one. She's really happy.
Can I ask how much your commission is for that?
Two hundred bucks. And I earned every penny.
My friends were having trouble in school, so I helped them make sense of the math problem.
You are such a math whiz.
Math does come easy for me.  I just get it.
Did your friends understand the math problem better after you explained it to them?
Definitely.  They said it makes sense the way I explained it.
You should become a teacher.  You are so patient.
I know your mom said you were having trouble in school. What subject?
I suck at math, especially algebra.
I can help you with algebra homework. Math has always been my best subject.
Show me how to do this homework problem then.
This is how you work out the problem. Does this make things easier for you?
Yes, hopefully I can pass my algebra test tomorrow!
I think I have decided where Ash and I should go next
where is that? Paris?
Yes! the city of her dreams. She always wanted to visit
make sure you go in the Summer, it's so pretty there
yeah, much better than here in New York I am sure
Yeah, the weather is quite nice there
I took Ash to see Paris, which she always wanted to go to.
That's great. Where did you fly from?
We live in New York so left from there.
How was Paris?
Amazing. One big city isn't always like another and I was impressed.
I am glad you guys loved it.
I don't think you need to worry about the property getting acquired anymore.
How can you be so sure of that?
The officials can't acquire it, since I got a court order to prevent them from doing so.
Wow, that's incredible you thought to get a court order.
I went to law school, so I know a thing or two about the courts.
I forgot that you went to law school, since you don't practice law.
I just got back from the courthouse!
What were you doing at the courthouse, Casey?
I had applied to get a court order to prevent the officials from acquiring the property the park sits on.
Were you able to get the court order to prevent it?
Yes, the judge issued a court order preventing it.
That's fantastic! Let's celebrate!
I love how Kendall does his flower arrangements.
He is good in what he does.
I have always admired him. He is such an expert.
I totally agree.
I hope one day you can share with us his talent.
I would love to see that.
So do you think you could give me some tips for my wedding arrangement? I want to do it myself, but you are an expert!
Sure! First off, what kind of flowers are you wanting?
I want succulents, baby's breath and tulips.
Interesting! So you'll want to gather all your supplies, and then I think it wil be easiest if I just guide you along then
Ok I will you know when I have all of the flowers!
Sounds good! It will be fun
I need Kendall's help.
Why?
She is a expert with the flower arrangements. Her wisdom could really help me.
I didn't know she was that experienced.
Hey Kendall, you know a lot about floral arrangement, right? Can you help me understand this stuff?
Well, I wouldn't call myself a pro, but sure, I can do my best. What exactly are the arrangements for?
Well, my sister is planning her wedding, but she doesn't want it to be super formal. She's trying to figure out the best flowers for the reception tables.
Well, There is a great deal that goes into these kind of things. Let me take a look at what you have so far.
Guess why I'm late for work?
I have no idea.
So, I am out the door and my parents ask me to take Ash to school.
Ash--that's your little sister?
Yes, and she's not ready.  She's in the bathroom, and you'd think that she's a teenager for how long it took her to come out.
I can imagine your frustration.
My parents asked me to take my sister Ash to school, but I had to leave for work.
Can you still have taken her?
I would be late.  Her school is in the opposite direction of my work.
Was there someone else who could have taken her?
My parents but I think they weren't feeling well.
How did your sister get to school that day?
I almost didn't make it work on time because I had to take my sister Ash to school.
I noticed you barely just made it.
It's because her school is on the other side of town.
There was nobody else to take her?
No. My parents asked me to do it since she missed her school bus.
Maybe next time you should just tell your sister to take a taxi.
My parents are always asking me to help them out and I am tired of it.
What is wrong with helping out?
They just always bug me and yesterday I had to leave work early and take my sister to school.
Oh did you get in trouble with your boss?
No, but I am tired of always helping out with my sister.
I suppose, but helping family is what it is all about.
Well, we were investigating the murder today.
What did you find?
Remy was shot in the back.
Was there an exit wound?
Yes, when I turned the body over I saw it and reported it to the chief.
Interesting. I have some other evidence I found on the scene to report as well.
I couldn't believe I found Remy laying face down in the parking lot.
What happened today at work with Remy?
When I turned his body over, I found the exit wound in his forehead.
I can't believe it happened in the police station parking lot!
I reported it to the chief. He said it looked like a hit.
Unbelievable! And no one heard the shot!
I couldn't believe what I had to do today. Sometimes I wonder why I ever became a cop.
Can you talk about what you had to do or is it classified or something?
No, I can talk about it. I had to turn a guy named Remy's body over to find the exit wound. He was just a kid.
I'm sorry. That must have been really tough on you.
It was. It's always harder when it's kids but the chief wanted the information. Plus, we need it to help solve the case.
I hope you find whoever hurt this kid. It makes my blood boil to hear stories like that.
Okay now we are ready to knead the dough.
How do we knead the dough?
Put your hands on top of the dough that's on the table.
Ok I'm ready.
Now I will gently press your hands into the dough so you can get a feel for the motions.
Wow I am learning to make bread!
I was teaching Skylar to make bread.
Was he a willing student?
Skylar wanted a hands on experience.
Was he able to follow instructions?
Skylar let me press his hands on the table with the dough.
It seems as if things worked out well for both of you.
I taught Skylar how to make bread yesterday!
Did you press her hands on the tab hele with the dough like your grandmother did to you?
I did, I wanted her to learn the old way.
She will appreciate that you took the time to teach her the correct way of doing it.
Do you want to help me make bread for tomorrow?
I don't know how to do that, can you teach me?
Absolutely, first put your hands on the table with the dough.
Oh, this is really fun, what do I do next?
I think you should now put your hands in the dough to make it flat.
This is so much fun, I didn't know how to do it.
I just got back from the annual county fair.
How was the fair?
It was pretty good since I got a lot of shopping done.
Did you go with anyone?
No, I wanted some alone time. But I did see someone I recognized. Kai's friend was there and I saw her while she was getting off the Ferris wheel.
I haven't seen Kai's friend in ages. Did you get a chance to talk to her?
What did you think of the fair?
I thought the shops were really neat.
I found some great items handcrafted in the shops.
Did you see anyone you knew there?
I actually saw Kai's friend coming off the Ferris wheel.
Oh, cool. I haven't seen her in a while.
You won't believe this, I won the raffle at the fair for a new car!
Seriously? How lucky are you!
I know right, there were hundreds of other people that were in the raffle too.
What car did you win?
I won a 2020 Subaru outback.
That is actually a great car and you are so lucky.
I can't believe I won this car!!
I know! You've never had a car this nice, it's worth so much money
I almost want to sell it a pocket some cash and buy a more modest car
But this one is so fancy!
I know but I can really use the cash
I understand that
I really gave them something to think about after I argued with them about how important it is to save the environment.
The environment is definitely important. What did you say to them ?
I told him how without a planet that is liveable, we cannot survive. That we all have to work together for the survival of humans.
So that really got through to them ?
Well , I said more than that, but I think they understand now the importance of this.
I think I really gave a good argument during the debate.
Were the other people not able to debate you?
They were at some parts. But I was able to throw a lot of uncertainty on the subject.
How do you know that?
They told me. They said that I gave them a lot to think about.
You seem to be enjoying your debate class.
My father told me he would reward me if I learned to play an instrument so I learned to play the piano.
Aren't you happy he did that?  You are getting a music scholarship for college now.
I am so thankful he supported my music.  He took me to lessons every weekend when I was growing up.
It makes a difference to have supportive parents.
He saw my talent.  Once I got more into music, it became my passion.
You are an amazing musician.  All that hard work paid off.
I'm looking forward to some extra money soon.
Really? Where's it coming from?
My Dad - he said he'd reward us kids if we learned to play a musical instrument.
But you don't know any instruments!
I do now; I've been taking piano lessons.
Good for you!
Dad is making me learn how to play an instrument.
Wow! My father never cared as much.
He won't get a bicycle this summer if I don't.
Your father drives a hard bargain. Have you chosen an instrument yet?
Yeah, Piano.
Cool.
My father bribed me, that is the only reason I play.
What did he offer to give you?
For every month I continue to play a musical instrument, I get 1000 put in my account.
I would continue to play if I were you..
Holy crap! I was able to buy a new car with my bonus money from work!
Oh, wow! How do you like it?
It's great! It's the jeep I wanted.
Sounds like you're moving up in the world big time.
I know. I'm so happy, cause it took a lot of work to get that bonus.
You really deserve it!
Getting a Christmas bonus was such a surprise!
Is that why you have a new car?
Yes, the company I work for is so generous!
I am jealous! I wish my job was the same.
I kind of worked hard all year, so I think I deserve it.
All I can say is not everyone who works hard get to be as lucky as you.
I love playing video games.
Then, play when you want to. It's summer vacation anyway.
I have to baby sit our baby sister.
Yes, you have to take care of her well.
When she is taking a nap, I can, I just kept the noise low.
Good, but be attentive!
Mom says I got to be quiet when she is sleeping.
Can you still play your video games?
Yeah but I have to turn it down, so my baby sister won't wake up
My mom makes me do the same thing, my baby brother will wake up to any noise.
I got to play some video games last night.
How did you manage that with your sister asleep?
It was tough, but I kept the noise down to a minimum.
You must have great self control.
Sometimes I get excited when I play, but I don't usually get very loud.
I bet that makes your sister happy!
I decided to play some video games last night while my sister was sleeping.
Doesn't she sleep in the same room as you?
Yeah, but she sleeps pretty heavily.
How long did she sleep while you were playing?
She slept for over 3 hours so I got a good night of playing in.
That's good, I'm glad the noise didn't wake her up and ruin it for you.
I have to speak softly, sorry. My baby sister is taking a nap.
Oh no problem. So what are you up to.
I'm just playing video games. Right now I'm playing Madden.
Aren't you afraid the game will wake up your sister?
I have it on mute. I concentrate better that way anyways.
Oh good thinking. Maybe I'll come over and join you.
I hope to marry the prince one day.
Are you in love with the prince?
I am not.  I wanted to marry the prince so that I can get close to the throne.
If your prince becomes king, you will be queen.
That would be Queen Taylor to you.
Keep on dreaming.
I'm not in love with him, but my family has arranged this courtship and they have convinced me that I will live a lavish life!
Well, what's more important to you, having a lavish lifestyle but being in servitude to another person, or the possibility of finding true love?
I don't know. I would rather be in love but I don't want to let my family down and end up living like a pauper.
Perhaps you should speak to both your family and your fiancé about this and clear the air.
I think I might do that. Thank you.
You're welcome. I wish I was in your situation. People have it much worse than you, keep that in mind.
Do you mind dropping me off at school? My mum won't do it.
Sure. Is your mother busy?
No. I she is protesting the fact that it takes me really long to get ready. My father even confiscated my phone over the same issue
I think they are overreacting.
I know, right? I just turned 14, they should treat me as such.
I agree with you on that.
Man, I got in trouble again...just for being in the bathroom too long.
Again?  Was it your mom again?
No it was dad.  He took my phone away for a week.  That's why I'm calling from Joe's phone.
That's terrible.  How are you going to live without a phone for a week?
I know.  It's bad enough that mom's making me take the bus to school.
You better get quicker at putting on makeup.
I think that was my best game of my life
how many threes did you sink in that game
im not sure i was just on fire
let me check the stats
what it say
damn girl you had nineteen three pointers
I got everyone to go to Alex's party.
Why?  Doesn't Alex hate everyone for stealing from him?
I got everyone to pay him back.
How did you do that?
I told them that what they did was wrong.
Wow, you are good at convincing people.
Alex, all of your friends are hear for your birthday.
I don't want to see them. They are not good people.
They are the only friends you got.
With friends like those, who needs enemies. They are always getting me into trouble.
So, what should I do?
I've got you. I don't need them. Get rid of them so we can go out for some dinner somewhere.
I hope my being here to babysit will be a good thing.
You have no idea how helpful you're being.
I've only heard stories about new-borns not sleeping. Is that what we're talking about here?
Yes! The baby stays up all night and I've had very little sleep these past few weeks!
Then tonight I will take over and you will get some shut eye.
You really are the best sister in the world!
I've been spending a lot of time helping my sister by babysitting so she can get some rest.
That's nice of you. I didn't know your sister had the baby already.
Yes, just a little over a week ago.
How is that going? Are you having a good time?
Well, it's a lot of work. The baby seems to only sleep during the day, and not for very long. I can see why my sister is exhausted.
I would be to, if I was kept up all night by a crying baby.
Did you have fun at the dance last night?
Had a great time how about you?
I had a good time and my date was nice too.
I caught a glimpse of you guys by the punch bowl.
That’s when Carson was getting me some punch.
Did you spike it?
This has been the best dance I've been to!
I'm glad! Why has it been so good?
My date has been so nice to me. He offered me some punch too
That sounds great! I think it's the little things that matter
Yeah exactly! It wasn't anything big, but it's the little actions that mean a lot
Well I'm glad you two had such a good time together
I think Carson likes me more than just friends.
What makes you think that besides the fact he follows you around everywhere like a puppy dog.
You know how he asked me to the dance.
Yes, he was beet red when he did.
Well, at the dance, he was so nice and when he offered me punch from the punch bowl I squeezed his other hand and said thank you and he nearly dropped the cup.
Yes, he definitely likes you, I think you should ask him out on a date
My future is really bad.
Yes but in the fire iron is formed.
this is true.
Don't be afraid of bad things.
I should embrace them?
Yes that is good.
What makes you think my future is going to be so negative Bailey?
I only read what the cards tell me, and that is the final answer.
Will I have anything happen in my life that will be happy?
This reading is not definite as you can change aspects of your own life, but the way you live now, you will have negative outcomes.
So if I can change certain things about my life then maybe none of this will come true?
Yes that is correct.
I had to study so hard to learn how to play chess, I had never played before.
Were there a lot of people at the chess tournament?
Quite a few. I really wanted to win the money to save the orphanage, so I was determined to beat everyone.
Who did you wind up beating?
The clergy from the local church! It was crazy.
Oh, funny! Well, at least it was for a good cause.
I was trying to study but kept getting really distracted by Sydney.
Was she playing music really loud again?
Yes, and I asked her to turn it down but she of course couldn't hear me.
So what did you do?
I went into Sydney's room and just turned it down for her.
That was really bold.
I'm trying to study for a test, be quiet.
ok what's going on
it's the final exam shut up.
Ok, want me to turn music down?
yes!
will do friend.
Sydney's music is so annoying.
What did she do now.
She's playing music while I'm trying to study for a big test.
You should turn the music down.
I just did, now she's yelling at me.
You should lock the door too.
I am s excited! !I woke up with a brilliant business idea in the middle of the night last night!
What about? Is it something you can share with me?
Of course! As a matter of fact, I think we can be partners in this.
Tell me about it! Maybe we can start working on it as possible.
Yeah, I'm sure people would love to have a Filipino bakery in town!
How wonderful! That is one dynamic idea! I'm sure they will sell like hot pancake!
I think this is my chance to quit my miserable day job.
It’s a really great product idea, so dynamic and innovative. I think you could do it.
I want to start my own business and sell them myself. I would be my own boss and in charge of everything.
What are your first steps?
I think I need to start with a business plan and then get some investors.
I can help you write up the business plan. Let’s get this thing going for you!
I thought of this great engineering idea made from 3D printers.
Oh, what do you think of its viability in the marketplace?
It's for building tiny homes and it's a great and fast way to do it.
That sounds impressive if you can start the business.
I plan to get some venture capitalists to fund my business.
This is a great start to a great idea!
Hey, I have been thinking a lot about starting my own business lately and wanted to talk to you about it.
Oh wow that is exciting! What is the business?
I came up with that new product idea that I think will work really well and want to have the business focus on making that.
I think that is a great idea and that product would be great, what do you need?
That is what I am not sure about, I believe I will need some start-up money and a more refined plan.
Perhaps you should talk to a bank or financier about this to get a more expert level opinion? Good luck!
We had a banquet for school last week and I have to say it was lovely.
Where did they hold it at? I didn't even hear about it.
It was just at the gym, but it was really nice still. They had it all decorated and the meal was lovely.
What did you eat?
We had steak and salad and roasted vegetables. It was delicious.
It sounds delicious. Just hearing about it is making me hungry!
Getting a bit cold in here isn't it?
yeah the fires dying out
ill go put some more wood in
thanks, i would have done it
no worries i really want to get back to the movie its great so far
it is, I'm loving it
I invited my girlfriend over to watch the new Star Wars movie last night.
How was the movie hangout?
It was fun and romantic. I got some wood and added it to the flame to start a fire in the fireplace at the beginning of the movie.
That sounds pretty cosy. I'm sure your girlfriend liked that.
Yeah, she was snuggled up against me under a blanket.
I wish I had a girlfriend to do that with.
This is a great movie.
I feel so comfortable watching the movie near the fireplace.
It's so cold outside.
I agree. It can be a little warmer in here.
I'll add more wood to the flame to keep the fire going.
Great idea.
So those are the rules and if you follow them we can have a great time playing.
I just have one question, can we take steps after we catch the ball?
No, you have to remain where you are once you got the ball.
Okay I think I understand it now.
So do we want to do random teams or have captains?
I think we should do captains but it is up to you.
So, here are the rules.
Rules to a knife fight?
Nice movie reference, funny guy.  Now pay attention.
Go ahead.
Everyone spreads out.  The blindfolded person calls Marco and everyone says Polo.  Then the blindfolded person must find someone and has to kiss them.
Well, that's a nice twist to the classic game.
No one knew how to play the new game.
None of our friends have played it before.
It is a new game but I know it well.
Did things work out for you and all of our friends?
I explained the rules before we began.
A good time was had by all I am certain.
Hey Tracy! What can I get you to eat?
I'd like a burger medium rare and a Caesar salad.
Absolutely! Do you want cheese on your burger?
No need, thanks Jordan.
You got it. And how about to drink?
I'll take a vodka martini, no vermouth, with a lemon twist.
Good morning what can I get you for breakfast today?
I'd like to order some scrambled eggs, toast and a cup of coffee please.
Anything else you'd like with your toast?
Yes. Some butter and orange marmalade  please.
Sure thing. I'll be right back with your order.
Thank you very much.
Sometimes I can't stand being a server at the restaurant.
Well, I know you work a lot of hours there, but you've never said that before. What happened?
Well, this girl named Tracy told me what she wanted.
Well, isn't that part of your job? Like get people what they want to order?
Oh. Of course. It's just the way she said it. It was demeaning and demanding. She was really rude.
Don't worry. Most people aren't like that, thank God.
I almost got hit by a car.
I told you not to be running around.
My parent came to the rescue fast.
I can't imagine Remy.
He gave me a tight hug.
I am glad you are OK.
Look I can do a flip!
Alex you need to stay away from the road.
Just watch me flip!
Alex watch out for the car!
Wow that car almost hit me!
I am going to hold you forever, I was so scared when that car almost hit you.
My mom was freaking out yesterday and held me so tight and wouldn't let go.
Did something bad happen?
I'm very active and was almost hit by a car.
Her reaction was right then!
I guess.
I did something wrong to Jesse
What happened this time?
I couldn't make it to the dance and forgot to tell her
did you leave her there alone?
Unfortunately, I made a mistake
You need to apologize
I can't believe he stood me up! He sounded so excited on the phone
He is so mean! you should just leave him. No good boyfriend would ever do that
Maybe he got lost or his car broke?
I guess that's true, we don't know if he did it on purpose yet
I won't be near as mad if it's just an accident cause something happened
Me neither!
If my parents didn't help me, I might have ended up homeless.  I am so thankful for them.
They don't want you to be homeless.
They tell me they are glad to help if they can.  They know it's a tough market to find a second job.
Everyone I know works a second job to make it in this city.
Rent and the cost of living is outrageous.
Too much demand and not enough supply.
When I graduated high school I was in an accident and I lost my job.  I could barely pay my bills for many months.
Oh no, that's terrible.  What did you do?
My mom and dad helped me so much, they nursed me back to health and helped until I got on my feet.
Did you pay them back?
I made sure they knew how much I appreciated their help; I thanked them every day and when I got my new great job I paid off their mortgage on their house.
That's so great!  That is an inspirational story and you know your parents appreciated it so much.
Hey, everyone, what are you all talking about?
Bailey, we have to talk. I know this is awkward, but it's about your hygiene.
What? I shower every week whether I need it or not.
Yeah, that's the problem. You smell very strongly of body odour.
I can't believe you'd say that. How hurtful.
I'm sorry, but the smell is becoming distracting.
Have you locked up the doors?
All the doors are locked and the till has been counted.
Do you need a ride tonight?
Yeah, if you could give me one. I have some gas money for you.
You know Alex, who works with me at the coffee shop?
Yes, I know her.
She lives on the same block as me so we commute together.
That's handy; you both save on gas that way.
Yes. We worked closing shift last night so I gave her a ride home in my car.
Next time it's her turn to drive, right?
Check out my new kitten, Sprinkles!
I didn't know you were getting a cat.
I didn't have any plans to. But I was at the park the other day and found this adorable gray kitten that was all alone. I had to have him!
But maybe this cat got lost and its rightful owner is looking for it.
Don't be so cynical!
You should put up some signs saying you found a lost cat.
I saw a grey kitten and brought it home.
Was it a stray you found on the streets?
No, it was in the park.
What are you feeding the cat.
Just some milk for now and small bits of leftovers.
I would be worried about not being able to care for the cat.
look what i found?
is that a kitten
yeah, it was all alone at the park
did you check if the mom was around
I did, there was nothing, I couldn't leave it there
I think I have some blankets and cardboard box we can use for it for now
They better refund me my shipping because two weeks is ridiculous after they promised two days.
It's crazy that you're still waiting for this package.
Definitely crazy, I just hope it comes in soon so I can finish this project
You never found it an actual store did you?
I search for about a week and was not able to find anything.
Well, you found it now and hope that you're able to get it so you can put it to good use.
I ordered my glasses online, and I haven't received it.
What was the expected delivery date?
I paid for priority shipping. I should've received it within three days after I placed the order.
Did you contact the company?
I checked my shipment status. It continues to say in progress. It's been two weeks, and the status is the same.
You should email or call the company. Ask them to find the location of your package.
Man these leaves just don't stop coming
Its a full time job for you isn't it
Hey i didn't spend so much time on my lawn and garden just to get it covered by leaves
Yeah but its Saturday, relax a bit
I'm a bit weird, this is relaxing
you don't have to tell me that twice
Did I mention how much I hate the fall?
You've done so once or twice in the years that I've known you.
It's like where are all these leaves coming from.
I'm glad I live in an apartment and don't have to do it.
Never buy a house.
Eventually I'll have to
I'm burnt out.
What have you been doing all day?
All I did today was raked the leaves.
Yeah, I noticed that the leaves were falling out of the trees.
It's a mess.
It will look nice when you are finished though.
There were leaves everywhere.  These yellow and orange leaves all over my front porch and on the flowers.
Did you get a leaf blower?
No I didn't buy the leaf blower.  I spent my whole Saturday morning raking the leaves.  It was a nice morning at least.
It's been very nice in the mornings.
I found a bird's nest in the tree next to the house.
That's awesome.
Let's play some ball.
It'll be fun like last time.
Let's get after it man, I got skins.
I got shirts.
best of three.
I'm going to win.
I played baseball today for the first time in a few years.
Did you do well?
Yeah. I was with some friends so it wasn't a competitive game.
That's good since you haven't played in a while.
Yes. I feel it in my knees today so thankfully it wasn't too much work.
It's still a good workout and you had fun.
That was fun.
Yes, I really enjoy playing baseball.
When should we do it again?
I'm up for a game tomorrow.
Great!  What time?
Let's meet up at the park after lunch.
I've been so bored being stuck inside.  Some friends asked me to play baseball so I agreed.
Where'd you go to play?
We went to Colin's backyard.  He has a really big backyard.
Did you all have a good time?
It was really fun.  I enjoyed being with the guys and getting some really good exercise.
I need to get some exercise myself.
That was the most fun I've had in a while.
Me too. It was a great game.
I'm not even that good at baseball, but it sure was fun.
You played really well, too. Those were some impressive home runs.
Thanks. I wonder if I'll ever be able to repeat it.
I'll bet you will. I think you're a better baseball player than you realize.
And did you if you take these they will help you feel better in an hour but you should...
did you say something?
then wait for the results and you will want more after a while...
Where is my watch?
these results have been proven to be better than the competitors in the market but you have to try it for yourself to see....
nice DD is having a buy one get one free doughnut sale, I'm out
Well, since you can’t listen to what I am trying to tell you, I will get straight to the point.
What is your point Ash?
My point is that you need to move on with your life and break up with Maria.
I love Maria and she is the focal point of my life.
Maria is a very bad girl with a notorious reputation. You must leave her now!
You are very brash and direct Ash!
I was talking to Frank about the situation at work and it was pretty obvious that he was getting bored.
Yeah, Frank doesn't like to discuss work when he's not actually at work.
Right.  When I was explaining the problem his eyes kind of glazed over and he started fidgeting, so I went ahead and got straight to the point.
What exactly was the point?
I was like, 'Frank, you're fired.' Then he wasn't bored anymore.
I bet he wasn't!  No wonder he killed himself last Tuesday.
My child was lost in school on the first day.
I am sorry to hear that.
It’s OK. Today I called the school to make sure that he got there.
Did he make it?
I was so relieved that he did.
Your kid is a smart kid. He will be all right.
Danny got lost on his way to school the first day.
Had you shown him how to get there?
I walked him there the day before school opened.
What happened today?
We went over the route before he left and to make sure he got there safely I called the school.
You are a helicopter dad.
No matter how crazy he drives me, I gave to give credit where credit is due.
Sounds like he did something right.
Oh my, yes! He taught me years ago done skills of the trade which I was able to use.
That's good. What area you working on?
I've got a little project going on at home.
Nice.
If you fold the material to the right it creates a better angle.
Wow, thanks. Where did you learn that?
Casey taught me when we were making masks last week.
That is a really good tip. It makes the sewing so much easier.
I know. Casey is really well-versed in sewing patterns.
I guess he is. Thank him for me.
I was getting tired of this attitude from kindle.
I don't' know what got into him lately.
Just a huge head that's it
We have to cut him down so they can feel some pain.
Well I think what I just did earlier is going to work for a little bit so we'll wait and see.
Patience is a virtue, and I have a lot of it.
I sacrificed my dog to the gods recently.
Why would you do something so horrible?
Because the gods would grant my wish if I did.
What did you wish for?
To be wealthy beyond my dreams.
Is that how you bought a new house?
This is going to sound evil, but I made a sacrifice to the gods of wealth last night.
What's so evil about that?
In exchange for wealth and good fortune I gave my dog.
That's not only evil but it's illegal.
Actually I only presented a photo of my dog, not my living dog.
Did the gods accept your offer?
I was really bummed when Dad cancelled our coffee shop time.
When was that supposed to be? I just saw him over at the concert in the park.
What. He cancelled our coffee time so he could check out his favourite 80's band?
Relax. Maybe he was embarrassed to cancel on you to see that old hair band.
I guess I can give him a break. What were you doing over there anyhow?
I like that music too!
My dad was actually the one who cancelled our lunch together.
I was really looking forward to it. That place serves the best coffee!
Luckily Cameron saw my dad at the concert the other day and they had a little get-together there.
That's nice, but I'm still out a cup of coffee!
We'll stop by the shop and get ourselves a cup later today.
I can't believe my dad cancelled our coffee meet up, it is such a bummer.
That sucks I did see him at a concert but did not know that was his plans
really, I didn't know he was at a concert he said he had to stay late for work
seems like he was probably lying to you so he could have some fun
I can't believe him . I make time for him but he wont even do the same for me.
I would call him out and talk to him about it, tell him how you feel.
I quit today.
why? I thought you were happy to find work.
I was but they hadn't told me that part of it was custodial and they told me to clean the sewers.
Oh, I think I would have quit too.
I guess that's why they didn't tell me in the interview.
Yes they probably thought you'd just do it once you were hired.
I just got a new job.
Wow, what's up with it?
I'm meant to clean the sewers but I don't like it.
Geez, that's dirty
I'm quitting tomorrow.
That's better.
Hi, you are not going to believe what happened at my new job today!
Try me! Did you meet the man of your dreams?
Not even close, I found out that part of my job was to clean sewers! Yuck!
For real?! You said the word was, what does that mean?
I quit as soon as I found out about the sewers! But I need a job fast! Any suggestions?
Lots of jobs available online. If you're desperate, you could try Amazon MTurk (just kidding), I like doing surveys for them in my spare time.
So the job duties included having to clean the sewers.
Holy crap.
I'm not one to flush opportunities down the toilet, but I quit the very next day.
That stinks but you have no time to waste.
You think I'd take that crap?
You don't take crap from nobody.
I haven't paid too much attention to the job description, but part of my job is to clean the sewers.
That's sounds dirty.
It is and dangerous.  I can catch some deadly disease.
Quite possible.  What are you going to do?
I quit the next day when I went in.
You have to love what you do.
Kendall can you go to the zoo and help Aubrey with the kids?
Aren't you going to go?
No, my boss called me into work.
Sure, I guess I can do it.
It should be fun and good exercise for everyone.
I guess you mean the exercise of running after your kids.
Hey Kendall, the kids really want to go to the zoo but I have to work, would you mind taking them
Not a problem at all
great, it will be fun
It will be fun for me too
I just wanted them to get out a bit more get some exercise
I understand, yea when ever you need help with them just ask
I think it would be a good idea if you lied down and got some rest
I haven't really been feeling that well since we had that Chinese food
it is possible that you got food poisoning from the restaurant
I hope not because I have my wrestling match in the morning and i want to be ready
I feel so tired and run down taking care of Cameron all day.
Why are you taking care of Cameron?
He was sick at school and his parents  weren't home, so I offered.
That's quite kind of you.
Well, it's the least I can do. Cameron has always been a terrific friend.
That's true and I'm sure that he would do the same for you.
I'm throwing a surprise birthday party for Addison next week. Are you free?
Sounds fun! How many people will be there?
I'm inviting around 30 people.
That's a good number of people. Is it at your house?
Yeah, it'll be at my place. Let me know by tomorrow if you're able to make it.
Okay, I will let you know.
O.K. everyone.  Next week is Addison's birthday.
We should do something,
That's why we're here--to plan a surprise party.
I love surprise parties.
They're not easy to pull off.
I know--everyone has to be able to keep a secret and act normal.
Okay guys, what's the plan for Addison's birthday?
Let's throw him a party. He's been bored ever since his girlfriend broke up with him.
That's a great idea. A party will really get his spirits up.
Where will we have this party?
At the local bar probably. I'll text all his friends so we can all get together and go in at the same time.
We're going to have a sloshing good time. Just you wait. And Addison will love it.
Addison's birthday is next week.
Are you going to do anything special?
Yeah, I want to get all of her friends together for a surprise party.
Are you going to be able to surprise her?
I think so because she thinks we're going to have the party the following weekend.
I see. So she won't be expecting it a week before. Good thinking.
I can't believe Jane told me her secret. She should have just kept it to herself.
And you told Kendall the secret?
I had to. I just tilted her head back and whispered in her ear. She wouldn't have graduated otherwise!
I understand. You had to tell Kendall, there was no way around it.
Exactly. So I can't feel bad about telling Kendall.
I would have done the same thing.
I only need the sapphire gem to complete the set.
Remy, how much money have you spent on your gem collection?
With this last gem, I have spent around $5,000.
$5,000! My car didn't even cost that much.
Well, I love them and they make me happy. And it's my money.
I know, Remy. It is just a lot of money for a handful of gems.
I had a great time tonight.
I did too. We need to do it more often.
Yes, definitely but for now I'm off to bed. Good night.
Good night. I'm going to bed also. I'll close the door behind Sydney after her leaves.
I had a pretty late night last night, I'm so tired!
Really? What happened?
Sydney was over until almost 1 a.m. and I was trying to give her hints to leave so I could go to bed!
Did it work?
Finally! It took a while, but she finally left and I closed the door after her and went to bed.
I'm glad you got some sleep!
I was just too tired to do anything else.
You guys had a long day yesterday right?
We put in about 14 hours.
I would've went to bed just like you that after a day like that.
I'm glad that I don't have to do again until one month from now.
I'll be able to help you guys out the next time it comes around.
a stranger was staring across the mall at me. made me feel really uneasy.
Was it a male stranger or female?
He was a male. That's kind of why I felt weird about it.
Was he your age?
No, much older. That's one of the reasons it was weird. If he was our age, I would have just blown it off probably. Like just someone that noticed me or something.
I think that would have made me uneasy too.
What is their problem?
Who?
That strange lady over there that keeps staring at me.
Just let it go it's a mall people from all around come here maybe they think you look like someone they know.
Well it really makes me mad when people stare like that.
I know but it's not worth getting angry over.
I decided to become an entertainer for birthday parties.
Do you have any parties booked?
I just performed at Alex's birthday party on Saturday.
What did you do for entertainment?
Alex made me do celebrity impressions.
I was hired to do Alex's birthday last weekend. She wanted me to do my Marilyn Monroe impression.
They loved it. I think this is a good career for me at least part time.
I'm going to give your name out to everyone I know to help you out.
That's nice but I don't want too much work.
Well if you are that good you can't stop your popularity.
Austin is doing this project for art class that I find kind of cool
Is it the one where he asks you describe paintings?
As if you were explaining to a blind person, yes that one!
Oh yeah, I like the idea but I don't like standing in front of the class
Same, I find it really embarrassing.
I did something really cool today.
What was that?
I described artwork for an app that helps the blind to imagine paintings.
That is really cool. I wonder if it works.
I hope so. They deserve it.
The artwork is a landscape of an ocean.
That is good. Is it of the shoreline?
Yes. It is a painting of the coast.
What is the weather like?
It is sunny with clear skies.
Okay, describe the waves.
I just got home from seeing Joy's concert.
How was it?
Joy was fantastic. I had no idea she could sing so beautifully and she has an amazing range.
Did the rest of the audience seem to like it?
She was the only person in the cast to get a standing ovation after her solo.
Wow, that is wonderful for her. However, I imagine the rest of the cast may not feel so good.
Have you ever met Bailey's girlfriend?
Just once. I didn't get to talk to her much.
Yeah same. But I think I kind of hate her now.
Dude, why? She seemed okay.
Bailey's been working overtime and I guess his girl is mad about it. Bailey asked me to pick up this expensive bracelet for her as a gift because she's been so mad.
Whoa, that seems messed up. She sounds entitled.
You know what I want to do?
What's that?
I want to go to a party.
That sounds like fun!
I'm so glad you said that because I was really hoping you would go with me because I like you.
I'm glad you told me that because I like you too.
I told my friend Steve that I liked him a lot.  I had had a crush on him since my freshman year.  I asked him if he wanted to go to a party with me.
How did he respond?
Well, I think.  He told me he would pick me up at 9 tonight.
Sweet.  You going to have a good time with him.
I hope so.  He's been very kind to me.
Sounds like he likes you too.
You know, I like you!
I like you too!
Let's go do something fun!
What do you suggest?
Well, I got invited to this cool party tonight.  Would you like to join me?
Yes I would!  When do we leave?
I just wanted to let you know that I really like you.
Oh wow. Thanks. I like you, too.
Do you want to come to a party with me?
Sure, I'd love to. It should be fun.
I am finally able to retire from active duty after 4 years.
Do you like being in the military?
Yeah it was a lot of hard work but the experiences I had will stay with me forever.
You are braver than I am, I probably would not have made it through boot camp.
You just have to keep telling yourself this is going to end eventually.
Now that you are back home we can hang out all the time now!
You know I have been enlisted for the past four years now?
Yes, you have been a good and loyal soldier the whole time.
I've fulfilled my duties and have been wondering about re-enlisting.
I feel that you are made for this work and you love getting out in the field.
I think I will do it but I'll talk it over with my family.
That's a great idea as they can give you the best guidance.
hey friend, what's up?
Hey Jesse, nothing much, you tell?
I fulfilled my duties as a soldier.
Okay, were you in the army?
yes, I was in the army for four years.
Great
How are you doing Kai?
I'm great. I would love to have lunch sometimes.
We can have lunch but not as a date.
You should consider dating me.
I only consider you as a friend. I would love to hang out as friends.
Okay, we can have lunch as friends.
I didn't tell Robin about Justin Bieber at the restaurant.
That's mean. She loves Justin Bieber.
She gets everything she loves, including my boyfriend. Now she missed out on Justin.
Wow! You are really angry about her.
Yeah I'm so jealous I could kill.
I feel a little guilty that the opportunity I gave Robin to meet her favourite celebrity backfired.
But it's not your fault that the celebrity had to cancel the visit.
But the cancellation was my fault, and only happened because I was so jealous of Robin that I wanted her to miss out on something for once.
Well, it's big of you to admit that.
I would never admit it to her face though.
Come on, stop being so petty and grow up.
I think I have to put my youngest son on a diet.
Is there something wrong?
Not really. He just weighs too much for his age.
How bad is it?
He weights twice as much as my older son Kai.
Wow, that is a lot.
I can't believe he's have gotten so big.
He needs to go on a diet.
I know, he's already weighing more than his older brother.
He weighs twice as much as Kai?
He just love eating cake.
Well his health is a lot more important than cake.
I don't know why Cameron was so interested in what my salary was.
Maybe she wants to know if you can spoil her.
That's what I'm thinking. That's why I lied to her.
Well, it's none of her business anyway.
I'm wondering if she likes me more for my money than me.
Try to see how she reacts when you just buy her flowers for her birthday.
Skylar told me that I was being rude to the customers but I didn't care.
Why were you like that?
I was just having a bad day.  My dog had died and I was so overwhelmed and sad.
I am sorry.  I know you were so tight with your dog.
He was my best friend and he's gone now.  I don't know what to do.
Maybe in time you can get another dog.
I was finally able to get away from the house and all those guys.
I bet you're happy to be away from them.
Happy is a understatement, the house was hell.
Well, I'm glad you're away from there and living in your own place.
Me too, no more drama and not being able to sleep because of noise.
I bet you slept like a baby last night?
I am always wanted to move out of the house.
Was there any problem?
Not really. I would never get out of there.
You got what you wanted.
I am just so happy that I did.
I can see that in your smile.
I'm thinking about coming over for the weekend but you live 20 miles away from me
I can take care of your kid for you when you go on that hike you wanted to go on
that sounds like a good deal to me just let me get ready
sure, give me a call before you leave so i can clean up my house
I have tried all high school to make the honor roll and finally made it
your family will be so proud of you
I think my dad said he would buy me a car if i finally made it
that is amazing i wish my dad would do something nice for me
I spent my whole high school career trying!
Did your effort yield a good result?
Yes! i made a honour roll during the first semester of senior year.
Congratulations! you should continue with the good works!
Thank you!
you are welcome!
I sent an angry email yesterday
who did you send it to and why?
I sent it to my mother and she replied almost immediately
oh no I bet she wasn't very happy
no I really regret doing that
maybe you can make it up to her somehow
Damn it.
What?
I was late with sending over the child support. I darkened Skylar's door.
Wait, why would you darken her door?
I don't have anything for you
you need to pay up Jordan I need to get things for our kids
Well, i don't have a job right now
you have money for beer and cigarettes
i need those
You need to get out of my doorway and go get some money before I get the cops involved
I  move to a new  city yesterday, I can't wait to explore.
Have you moved out of your parents' house already?
Yes. I did it as soon as I had graduated from high school.
That is very daring of you. I wish you the best.
I just left for a new city.
Wow, it's barely a week you just graduated.
Yeah, we had barely graduated from high school, but I've moved to a new city.
That's awesome.
Yeah, Dad financed me.
My own dad is not serious, I have to move on in this city.
I couldn't wait to leave my home town.
I can tell-just graduated from high school a month ago and now you're here.
When I answered your ad for a roommate, I didn't know I'd get a friend out of the deal.
Yes, it's really worked out.
Lucky for me; without your help I would have been lost in this city.
Yeh, a little bigger than what your used to.
I drank way too much at the party last weekend, and I broke some furniture at my friends house.
Wow, really? What happened?
I guess I just started running amok.  I was dancing on a coffee table and it broke.
Do you remember doing it?
Vaguely, I remember laughing like crazy when I landed on the ground.  Looking back, I know I need to finally get some help.
Yeah, I think you're right.  Let me know if there's anything I can do to help you.
So I woke up this morning with a massive hangover and a mystery stop sign in my bed.
You seriously stole a stop sign when you were drunk?
Apparently. It's not like I can remember it.
You should put it back! Someone could get hurt.
Screw it, everyone in this town nags me about my drinking anyway.
That's because you're always doing stupid things like this when you're wasted!
I just got home for the emergency room.
What happened?
I went out last night with Tom and, from what I'm told, I tried jumping over three garbage cans in the bar parking lot.
You don't remember?
No, I don't. I guess I ran and jumped but landed on top of the cans. I cut my leg open and it required ten stitches.
Cameron, I think we need to talk about your drinking. I am concerned.
I don't think last night was very good.
Were you drinking again?
Yeah.  I think I drank too much.
Maybe you should get some help with your drinking.
That's what my other friends keep telling me.
I know a good place that my aunt just recently went to.
I'm going to be late for work.
Why? Are you feeling sick?
No. I tried to drive through a snow pile and I got stuck in the snow.
Do you need a tow?
I called one. They should be here soon.
I really hate having a car in the snow
Same. Did you have an incident today?
Yeah i got stuck after trying to drive through a snow pile
So sorry to hear that! That must be annoying
It was! I'm so tired of winter
Same I cant wait for summer
I've been getting along with Bailey a lot more at school lately.
I saw you two hanging out at lunch. When did you become friends?
Bailey helped me on some homework I was struggling with. Now I'm trying to return the favour by being kind to her.
I'm glad you two are hanging out. I like both of you.
I'm so glad that I was able to finish that homework yesterday.
Were you having that much of an issue with it?
Yeah I was. It's a good thing Bailey actually helped me to understand the work?
That's nice of him.
It was. That's why I'm going to start being kind to him at school.
Is that way you bought him extra milk at lunch today?
I'm taking Ash's share of the money to the safe house.
She is too injured right now to carry it.
I know.
Ok.
The money is in the safe house now.
Did everything go as planned.
Ash got a little cut, but everything else worked out well.
Good. I was really nervous about you guys.
I had to carry Ash's share of the money with me to the safe house.  Ash got shot on our way out of the bank after the robbery.
Are you telling me you and Ash robbed a bank?
Do you believe that?
I don't want to, but yeah, I do.  You guys are crazy like that.
Ash is healing at an undisclosed location.  His dad who is a doctor is treating his wounds.
Well, he definitely can't check into a hospital.
So here's Ash's cut of the money.  I'm delivering it for him like I promised.
Where's Ash?  Why isn't he bringing his share himself?
Didn't you hear?  Ash got shot when we were on the way out of the bank.  He threw me his bag and said he would keep the cops busy while the rest of us got away.
I didn't know it went down that way.  Is Ash dead?
I hope so.  If he is then we get to split his cut between us.
Oh, yeah!  I hope he went out shooting!  Get on the Net and see if you can find out anything.
I am excited about my tropical vacation.  I am looking at some really cute outfits online.
Nice.  Where are you going?
South America, somewhere.  It's the middle of summer there and very hot.
The good thing is you don't have to pack too much.
I don't have anything that's appropriate for hot weather so I am spending a fortune buying a new wardrobe for this trip.
You are going to look amazing.  It's worth it.
How do you like the new gear, got it for the trip
Its great but I don't think your bank account is loving it
oh it will be worth it trust me
I guess there's a new dress for each day
Pretty much cant be caught wearing the same thing while I'm there
I really like that one
I am looking forward to a vacation.
That is a normal emotion.
I think I went a little overboard.
What do you mean?
I spent a fortune buying a new wardrobe for the trip.
That can only add to the enjoyment of the trip. Have fun.
I'm so happy I got my TV to start working again
Oh i bet. It's never fun to have to buy something really expensive when you don't need to
Yeah I thought I was going to have to, but it ended up being an easy fix
I'm glad you got it working. I know you only bought it a few months ago
Yeah that was the frustrating part. I hope it doesn't happen again
Me too. You should definitely check the warranty too
Cameron how could you kick a dog like that? That is just horrible!
I was trying to teach him not to use the bathroom inside the house.  He had to learn!!
I don't care that he pooped inside your house.  You shouldn't treat a dog like that.  That is why is videotaped it.
Well don't go around showing everyone.  That is embarrassing.
No I think everyone should know how cruel you really are.
I am actually an animal lover.  I love dogs.  It was just a one time thing.  I am sorry.
Cameron's absolutely furious with me. They practically chased him out of the party!
What happened?
I showed everybody the video of him where he's kicking that barking dog.
Yikes, he's never going to live that one down.
Despite all the political disagreements these ayes, the one thing everyone can agree on is don't kick dogs!
Yeah, even I stated to hate Cameron after watching that video.
Oh what the hell did I do with this lasagne. I forgot the ricotta cheese. Now its just pasta with sauce.
Well, it should still be good.
I have to make lunch for my daughter. Maybe I will just dump some in a container for her lunch.
She's can't take that to school. There's no microwave.
She can eat it cold. No one checks.
They do in kindergarten.
So I went to my co-worker's house last night for dinner finally and got to meet his family.
That's nice, be fortunate that you get along with your co-workers enough to do that. I don't really get along with any of my co-workers because we are so competitive in our jobs.
It would have been nice, had his wife and I not already known each other in the most uncomfortable way ever, and rather than just playing it off, I fell to my knees with shock.
Now I'm curious. Who was she and what was so bad about how you knew each other that made you fall to your knees when you saw her?
She was my high school and college sweetheart. We dated for the longest time until she cheated on me with some guy that worked with her during her internship which just happened to be my co-worker.
I don't even have a response for that. I would have just turned and walked out the door, or in your case, crawl out the door since you fell to your knees when you saw her.
Thanks for bringing me along. I like hanging out with your friends.
Anytime! They like chatting with you too. I'm actually glad you guys get along.
Your friends are a lot of fun. I also love this bar. I like the ambiance.
Yes that's why we like coming here. The music is not too loud that you can enjoy talking and joking around each other.
The pool tables are a lot of fun too, especially when I beat your friends.
Yeah but they don't like that. at all.
Since Quinn is talking to some people at a bar, I figure how you guys know him?
We met him at work actually.
That's nice. Quinn really loves his job.
Yeah, we all like working with him. How do you know him?
We've been friends since high school.
Wow, that's a long time.
I'm so glad coach gave me a chance to run again
I knew he would! You're one of the best on the team
Thanks for saying that. I guess I've just had a few bad weeks
That can happen to the best of us. As long as you're good now
Yeah I feel a lot better. I think I just needed some rest
I'm really happy to hear that. Let me know how the race goes
My boyfriend is so terrible when it comes to birthdays, it's really frustrating.
How is he terrible at birthdays. Does he forget when they are or something?
Usually. This time, though, I thought it was different. He actually gave me a gift which was beautifully wrapped--
Well, that sounds promising. At least it's a little bit of progress, right?
--but inside was the ugliest scarf I have ever seen. And I don't even wear scarves.
Oh. I guess it's good that he's trying, at least. Some people just have bad taste.
Thank you for paying me back.
Thank you for lending me the money.
I know you are always good for your word, and you promised to pay me back quickly.
I appreciate your confidence in me.
Why did you need the money?
I just needed to pay the electric bill which was due before my pay check came.
I loaned some money to Remy last month.
Did he pay you back?
He paid me back right away.
That's good to hear. It doesn't always happen that way.
Remy is always good for his word, I've found.
That's an important trait for friends to have.
NO!
Yo, what's wrong?
I burnt my finger on this pan, it's not good.
Oh no man, how bad?
I think I might need to go to the ER.
Get in the car, lets go.
I was cooking dinner for my parents and I accidentally touched the pan as it was coming out of the oven.
So I assume you must have gotten burned.
Yes, the tips of my fingers got burned.  It hurt so bad, and the worse thing was it kept hurting.
Did you run them under some cold water.
I did. That helped while they were in the water but as soon as I stopped they started throbbing again.
Hopefully it turned out to be a good meal at least.
Hey! I just got my first mortgage.
That is good news if you and your spouse can keep your jobs.
This is suppose to be a great time in my life and you respond like that?
Life is not certain. Try and save some money so you can keep the house if one of you lose your job.
I see your point.  I suppose we can eat out less and save some money in that way.
Good. Learn that lesson as I lost my house by overspending and not saving for a rainy day.
I hope we will get approved for the loan.
I really like the house we found.
I just got the call and we got approved.
That is a great relief on my mind.
I guess we better start getting ready to move.
Should we just throw everything away and buy all new stuff?
O.K., let's go.
You better tell your roommates.
No one is here.
Well, leave a note.
Good idea.  I'll put one on the board in the kitchen.
We're going to have fun today.
I just ran out the door.
Okay good. Did you let your roommates know?
I did indeed. I wrote them a note on the board in the kitchen.
Nice work! It's always good to keep them informed.
Yeah I think so too. Better safe than sorry.
Exactly! You are one smart cookie.
I ran in the marathon yesterday.
You must get really thirsty running those.
Yeah, but there are booths.
Do you have to pay to get something to drink there?
No, you just take a drink as you go.
That must really help to stay hydrated.
I ran the long marathon today.
Oh that's right, how did you do?
I did okay, but I was so thirsty the entire time.
I'll bet, did you have a water bottle?
I did not have a bottle but I drank from one of the booths at the fourth mile.
Oh I see, it's great that they have so many booths for the runners.
I have something hard to tell you, Kendall.
What have you done, Jan?
At the race track, I lost the money you lent me for my rent.
Well, what are you going to do about it?
We've got to win it back.
Are you kidding--you want to lose more money?
I was so sick I couldn't go to work.
What? I thought you loved working?
I do, but I was really sick.
You should've just took some pills and went.
I was feeling so sick this morning.
Yeah I didn't see you in the office today
I had to take the day off
Oh no what kind of symptoms did you have?
I was actually throwing up this morning
I hope you feel better Carson
I've felt sick to my stomach and started throwing up.
Do you think it's something you ate?
Or it could be a stomach bug.
Did you take the day off work?
Yes, and I think I will stay home tomorrow.
Maybe you should go to the doctor.
Have you had to work with Tracy yet.
No, but I hear she's not easy to work with.
She's not.  We were assigned a project a week ago and she insisted on doing it her way, even when I pointed out her plan wasn't going to work.
Did you guys finish it?
Just barely, we ran out of materials we needed before we got half way through and we had to ask for extra money to get what we needed to complete it.
Yikes, I'll make sure I don't get assigned a project with her, sounds pretty bad.
Well, we're out of blue construction paper.
Try using the backing of those Amazon boxes.
But they don't match. What about the puppy's wee pads.
Okay, but make sure they are used ones. We need yellow paper now.
Ewww.
I had such a long day today.
Are you ready to wind down?
Yeah, I'm brushing my teeth right now, then I'll go straight to bed.
Okay, have a good night.
While brushing my teeth, I noticed something.
What did you notice?
They were ready to sleep.
How did you know they were tired?
I just brushed my teeth and climbed into bed.
Wow, it is kind of early. Is everything ok?
Yeah. I just had a really long day.
Oh that makes sense. I have been working extra shifts lately so I have been pretty tired too.
I think I am going to get to sleep now.
Sounds good. I will talk to you in the morning.
What a long day. I'm so tired.
Hurry up and get to bed then!
I'm still brushing my teeth, but then I'm ready to go to bed.
Don't forget to floss! Do you have to get up early tomorrow?
Yeah, unfortunately. I have an 8 am class.
That's terrible. I don't have class until 10!
We can talk but we have to make it quick because I have to get to work.
Why are you in such a hurry?
I am always running late. I need every second to get ready in the morning, and then every second to get to work on time.
Why don't you try setting timers so you know when it's time to move on to the next task
Because then I would be running around with half washed hair and have a face of makeup.
It might be better if you are just running late then
I feel like I'm always in a rush.
What makes you say that?
I just feel like I never have time to do the things I want to do.
How many hours a week do you work?
50 plus 3 kids to take care of.
That does sound like a lot.
Come on red light hurry up I don't have time to waste!
Relax Bailey it will turn green any second.
I need every second I can get.
You are always in a hurry I swear.
I know I have a lot of things to get done today.
I understand that but you need to take time to relax as well.
How's your day today? Are you ready for work?
I have never been more prepared.
Good for you! I am looking forward to my duties today, I too have had breakfast  and got dressed  for work.
You go get them!
I wish you the best too.
I'm heading into the office today.
But it's Saturday!
I know. But I got up super early and was finished with breakfast by eight. I figured I'd get dressed and go work on my presentation for a few hours.
You really want that promotion! You couldn't work on your presentation from home?
Well I could, but I want to practice in the conference room I'll be using.
That's a super smart idea. That way there are no bad surprises.
I had a pretty normal start of my day.
I guess nothing unusual happened this morning?
Like clockwork, I got up and had breakfast.
That seems normal.
After breakfast I dressed and headed for work.
You are like a robot, Aubrey.
Today was not the most exciting day I've had, but I got everything done I needed to.
What happened?
I woke up on time, ate on time, had my clothes cleaned and ready for work and then headed off to work.
Some days are boring days.
Boring is better than disastrous, so at least nothing went wrong!
I'm on the lake.
Let's go fish.
Here' some bait.
I hate the worms though
Yea those suck
So gross.
I'm at the lake right now. I'm going to spend the day fishing.
That sounds like fun. I love to fish.
It's a beautiful day here. Hold on, I'm going to cast my line.
What kind of fish are in the lake?
I have no idea! Hopefully I find out soon.
Well catch something good so we can cook it up tonight.
Hey Kai, sorry I'm late.
We need to talk, and you better not be breaking up with me!
Um, my mom got in a car accident and I have to go see her right away.
Oh no, that's horrible, let's go see her.
I, umm, the doctor said they'll only allow one person to see her.
Oh okay, I guess we'll have to talk tomorrow then.
I don't want to break up with Kai until tomorrow.
What if she wants to get together tonight--you won't be able to handle it.
I covered that-I said I'm helping you write a poem tonight.
That sounds stupid, and now I have to go along with it.
Well, she seemed to buy it, and not to worry, after tomorrow she won't be speaking to either of us.
Good point.
I didn't break up with Kai yet. I'm going to wait until tomorrow.
Don't you think the sooner you tell him, the better?
I'm just too scared to. So I just told him a fictional story instead.
A fictional story about what?
It was about how I might be moving away for a job.
That does sound like a fairy tale.
The air mattress got a leak in it.  It was leaking air fast so I had to fix it right away.
What did you fix it with?
I took some glue and stop the air from coming out.
Are you going to buy another one?
Eventually.  I don't have the money for it now.
I have one that I am not using.  You can have it.
I heard an obnoxiously loud laugh during lunch today.  I looked up and saw Jesse sitting a couple of tables from me.
Was Jesse the one who laughed?
I am not sure.  It's definitely someone to the right of me.
Did you say hello to Jesse?  How's he doing?
I waved at him but I was in a rush so I didn't get a chance to talk to him.
Your schedule is always so tight especially at work.
I think Jesse might have noticed me.
Did you two interact?
Not exactly, Jesse laughed really loud at lunch today.
Did you say something funny?
No, I just looked over at Jesse when it happened.
I'm not sure Jesse noticed you.
I am so curious as to what Jesse was talking about at lunch today
Was he talking to you?
No he was across the room and all of a sudden I heard Jesse laugh real loud, it was so loud it made me look over at him
Hmm sounds like it was an interesting conversation he was having
It was a bit loud, I had to keep looking over there to see what was going on
Well sometimes people get loud when they are happy
I really think I can get into an ivy league school.
Are you sure you can? I do not know if your grades are good enough.
My grades have been improving for months!
Oh wow, they really have. Maybe you can get in.
I know that i can get in.
I'm so excited! My parents are letting me apply to Harvard.
Wow that's great! Do you think you'll get in?
I don't know, but I wanted to at least try.
Have you been to Boston before?
No and I really want to go. I love baseball and really want to see Fenway Park.
You know the Celtics play in Boston too right? Yuck.
I think I'm fit to attend Princeton or Yale.
How do your parents feel about you going to a college that will set them back thousands and thousands of dollars?
At first they were sceptical.
What changed their minds?
I have high grades and have been accepted at both of the Ivy League colleges I want to attend.
Mazel Tov.
I made a new friend today.
Where did you meet them?
We were in the same section at the book store.
Oh, so you must have the same interests.
Yeah, and we ate out later and got along great.
I'm happy for you.
Hey Charlotte, what are you doing for dinner tomorrow?
I don't have many plans after class.
How about we go out to the Barnside Diner for dinner?
I think that would be a great idea to eat there.
Yeah, we can catch up on the latest news and see how college is going so far.
I'd love to chat and see what you are up to as well!
As a new friend let me serve you dinner.
Let's go out to eat.
Sounds good to me.
I like Italian food cool?
Yea that works for me.
Awesome let's go!
It's so great to see you, Susie.
It's great to see you too!
So do you want to maybe get a bite to eat or something.
Sure, that sounds great. How about we get pizza?
That sounds fantastic. There is a great pizza place right down the street.
Perfect!
My friends drove down from up north to visit me.  We met online so this is the first time I am meeting them in person.
Do you like them in person?
I like them a lot.  We went out to the Thai restaurant that opened up next to the bookstore.  They like spicy food.
That's a great place.  I go there with my friends after the movies.
It was so comfortable hanging out with them.  We've chatted online for months but I didn't know what it would be like in real life.
Online isn't real life, that's for sure.
It was funny yesterday,
What did you just do?
I called the girlfriend of Audrey and told her of a bomb scare.
Did she believe you?
She did it first. Later she realized I was kidding.
That was a bad joke.
I got home an hour ago from school.  My mom picked me up today.
That's nice to be picked up.  How was school today?
My teacher, Nancy, asked me to read in front of the class.  You know I've been struggling with my reading skills, but I've been reading a lot lately and practising
How did that go?
It think it went really well.  I can tell I've improved.
Terrific.  Keep on reading.
Mr. Booker asked me to read in front of the class this morning when you went to the nurse's office.
How did it go?
Well, I was a little nervous at first but I felt a lot more confident because we have been working together to improve my reading abilities.
That's wonderful, Remy. I'm glad your hard work is paying off.
I was actually excited to read outload. I just wish you could have been there to see.
I'm sure there will be more times. I am really happy for you.
Guess what happened to me yesterday!
Give me a hint.
My dreams have finally come true. I've become a model!
Wow, congratulations!
Hey Rubs, I got my dad a present for Christmas.
What did you get the old guy?
I got him his favourite, a huge stack of Filet Mignon steaks!
He's going to love that! He loves the way you grill them and then he eats like 3 of them.
You know it. Come on over, you're invited for Christmas next week. We'll have plenty of steaks going around.
Oh, I'll be there, trust me! Thanks Lee.
I always seem to procrastinate. I just spent way too much time scrambling to finish my work.
What did you put off this time?
I had a paper for school and I waited for weeks to sit down and get to work. I had to really focus to finish in time.
Do you think it is going to get you a decent grade still?
I hope so I put a lot of effort into it even though I waited until the last minute.
Well let me know what it earns you, and maybe next time don't wait until the last minute!
Bailey, I see that you have a history of hard work and that you are an honest person.
Yes, I am trying very hard to be an asset to the community.
I believe you and I think you were not at the scene of the crime.
Yes sir, I was working at the industrial park at the time.
Thanks for being honest with me and we'll make sure you are not a suspect.
I appreciate you working through this and serving our community.
I got that girl off.
You found out who committed the crime.
Yeah, I knew she didn't do it. I put a recorder in the boyfriends bag and he was talking to his friend.
Damn, that was smart and you kept a girl from spending her life in prison.
Don't worry Bailey, I'll clear your name.
Yes Casey please, I'm innocent.
I believe you are. Just stay persistent everything will be good.
I am. I trust you.
You see Bailey, with hard work and faith I believed you were innocent, and we cleared your name.
Wow Casey, this is great news. Thank you.
I am so hungry!
What are you going to eat?
I saw some sandwiches over there.
They look good, go eat one.
I haven't eaten in days so it will be so good.
You should eat more often.
I was so hungry I just ate a huge sandwich with salami and pickled peppers and swiss. I have not eaten in days.
What did you go so long without eating?
I was trying to fast to lose weight. I only drank water for 3 days.
That's kind of extreme. Did it work?
Yea , I lost 4 pounds , but I probably will gain it back.
My mommy never lets me play at the park long enough.
Maybe you get there too late. Can't you go earlier?
No, because she doesn't get home from work until late.
What do you do when you go to the park?
I just play with my ball. Today I got so mad, though, that I didn't even do that.
That's too bad. You should just try and make the best of the time that you have.
I don't want to leave i don't want to
Pick up your ball its time to go
No, i want to play
Sasha you are making a scene and we have to go get daddy
Daddy would want me to play too
No i think daddy would like us to take him home
I don't want to go home yet.  I want to stay and play.
Sasha, honey it is time to go home.  No more playing.  So put the ball down.
Just 10 more minutes.
No Sasha.  We are going home now.  We have to leave the park.
Okay but I am still mad.
No more temper tantrums Sasha.  I have had enough.
i cant believe you wont let me stay a few hours more
you know we have to leave soon because your mom wants you home
I'm not leaving and you cant make me leave
I guess if that's the decision you want to make then that's your decision
I'm going to have to lock the cat up in a cage.
It seems like every other day it runs and hide from you.
I don't get it because I'm so nice to it.
It's just a crazy cat, no need to worry about it.
Enough about the cat what are you up to?
Just doing a little bit of cleaning around the house.
I really thought my cat escaped out my front door again. I was so worried.
Where did you find your cat? I didn't see flyers for a lost cat.
I started looking in my house, in cupboards and closets. Then, I walked the neighbourhood, door to door.
Did one of your neighbours have him?
No. When I got home to make flyers I heard a meow. I looked under my bed and there is my cat.
Now you know the next time this happens to look under the bed first.
I lost my favourite cat today again. It took me an hour to find her.
Oh no! Did she get out of the house again?
No. She was just under the bed thank goodness.
Why did it take so long to find her under the bed.
I thought she got out of the house again so I started in the back yard. I looked everywhere and the bed was one of the last places.
Well at least you found her and she was safe.
I'm so glad we found peanut i was worrying so much
have you ever thought of putting a tracking collar on her?
I thought about it but she wouldn't like it i think
well, you could always get one and see
I wonder how much they are at the store
I don't think they cost too much really
Have you seen Mr. Stripes?
Did you lost Mr. Stripes again Aubrey?
I did, I feel so bad just help me find him.
Ok I will but you should treat your pets better.
I will I promise, wait a moment I found him.
Where is Mr Stripes?
Hey Greg! Bet you're surprised to see me at work this early!
Actually, I am. I know your train doesn't usually pull in until around 8:30am.  It's barely 8:00am now.
I know. I got up this morning and it was just so nice and sunny out that I decided to get going early.
So, you didn't take the train?
Nope. I showered, grabbed a toaster waffle and headed out the door.
Well, I have to say it is a nice day for a walk. If it's still nice around noon, maybe I 'll take one on my lunch hour.
I decided to walk to work today.
That's really good exercise.
Yeah, when I walked out my front door, it was so beautiful and sunny I decided I wanted to be outdoors instead of on the train.
The weather is always beautiful in June.
Especially in the morning before it gets hot.
Maybe I should walk home from work, too.
I walked all the way to work this morning.
Wow. The train didn't come?
No, it did. But the morning was so beautiful, I just thought it would be nice to walk.
That's a long walk. Don't you get all sweaty?
No, I just pace myself so I don't work up a sweat.
Impressive. I don't think I have that kind of self-control.
I'm going to ride my bike to work today. It's gorgeous weather out there.
It's nice having such a nice, bright, sunny morning. But, that's a long ride.
I can use the exercise besides I'm tired of riding that smelly train.
Boy, I hear you. All those dumb people talking on their phones is enough to make you scream.
Exactly, so I'm going to be a solitary man and ride my bike!
Have fun and be careful. Lots of crazy drivers out there who don't pay attention to bicyclists.
Wow, that Addison was out of control again in class.
What did you do this time.
What else? I sent him to the principal's office again. Not sure if that is a real solution to his behavioural problems.
Addison is a great kid. You just have to make sure he takes his meds.
But why is it my responsibility to make sure the kid takes his meds. Isn't that his parents' job?
You're right. But his parents are also need to take their meds at work then address the kid's behaviour.
This kid was being so loud and wouldn't be quiet in class.
That's disruptive.
It was impossible for me to teacher the class with him acting up so I sent him to the principal's office.
The kids needs to be disciplined.
He didn't show up for class today.  I hope everything is okay with him.  He's not a bad student.  He's ill behaved sometimes.
Hope he starts behaving himself.
What a day! I had to send a student to the principal's office.
Why? What did the student do?
They brought rocks to class and was throwing them at other students.
Oh my! Was anyone hurt?
Thankfully, no. Someone could have been hurt though.
That is good that no one was hurt. I hope the student understands throwing rocks is bad.
Man I'm bummed
Whys that?
You know that Pokémon go fest i took off work for?
Yeah, what about it?
Well i have to go to a last minute business conference and wont get to play
Ah man, I'm sorry for you
How do you feel about these conferences?
They aren't too bad for me. How about you?
Can't stand them. I get all antsy for it to be over.
Sometimes you just have to sit down and zone out for a while, thinking about something else. At least that's what I do.
Haha, I may just give that a shot!
I really want to attend the tennis tournament.
Sure but you need to reschedule it tomorrow.
I don't want to sit here all day and attend this business conference.
You have no choice. It's part of your responsibility.
Oh men. Just make sure to reschedule my tennis tomorrow.
I will. No problem.
My friends were swimming at the pool.  I had this business conference I couldn't get out of.  All I can think of was how much I want to be swimming with my friends.
Did you go for work?
I did.  The owner went to so I had to show up.
You can swim with your friends next time they have a party.
They know I was upset about it so they are throwing another party this weekend.  I can make it to that.
There you go.  Everything worked out.
I've been working on this drawing for weeks.
Hey, slow down Tracy you'll put us all to shame.
I can't I really want to win this drawing contest.
Yeah, well I heard you've been selected for the big prize already.
Really, where'd you hear that?
I'm not telling.
I entered that art contest a few weeks ago and I found out I won!
That's awesome. What is the prize?
I am not sure right now. I only know it is a big prize.
You are such a talented artist. It doesn't really surprise me to think you won.
Thanks. That really means a lot to have your praise.
I only speak the truth, my friend!
I had a disgusting experience today.
What was so bad?
I was eating my food, and there was a huge bug in it.
What did you do with the food?
I stopped eating and threw it out.
I hope you brushed your teeth.
I think being good sucks.
Why would you say that?
What would you expect of such powerful wizard as myself? I prefer evil because goodness is lame.
I've heard that they burn witches at the stake.
I am not worried about that. My  power is too immense to be defeated by fire.
It better be. The villagers don't like your kind.
Sometimes I feel like a powerful wizard. I can suck up all the good in favour of evil.
You exude goodness.  You are so spiritual.
I feel connected to the universe.
I have seen how you talk to the birds, animals and trees in the mountains.
They speak to me , the wind speaks to me. The rocks and everything around me.
That's magical.
Evil will win today.
Taylor you're too strong!
My light magic will overcome all the good in the world.
Please you will get hurt.
I will be protected, I am a powerful wizard!
Oh my you did it!
I think my wizard powers are starting to corrupt me.
What makes you say that?
I've been taking away all the goodness in the world in favor of evil. The dark side is tempting me.
You have to resist it, Taylor! Turn back to the light side of magic!
I really have a lot to do today, But I couldn't leave Skylar on her own. She's going through such a hard time.
Wait, so you dropped your date just to go see Skylar?
Yeah, I just told her that we can rearrange. This is more important.
Just make sure she doesn't take advantage of it.
Sure, she wouldn't do that to me anyway.
I wouldn't be so sure.
We'll see.
So, I had plans to go see the Yankees play and then Skylar messaged me saying she cooked me a 3 course meal and that we would be spending the night in a five star hotel.
Woah, that's a tough choice.
You'll never guess which one I chose.
Yankees?
Wrong, Skylar. I had to drop everything for the day.
I had to yell at Ash today.
Why?
Ash's kids were making a mess of my house, so I yelled at them first and then told him off too.
I have always felt like his kids were wild.
I know Ash didn't mean to embarrass me but it was very offensive for him and his family to talk during my speech.
What do you mean?
Well it was incredibly distracting for one, so I had to yell at his kids and then at him because he didn't care.
That was no reason to yell at the baby though, she doesn't understand.
What would you have suggested then?
You could have stopped for a second and taken Ash to the side, told him how you felt and then continued.
I took that test a few minutes ago, it wasn't hard.  I got a high score.
What test?
My friend sent me a link to this test that's supposed to test a person's IQ.
You would do well on that.  You are so smart.
I scored in the 90 percentile.
That's like genius level.
I got a nice score so far.
You're going to really excel.
I hope so.
The smarts are what it's all about clearly.
You know it, couldn't live without them.
What were we talking about again?
I took Addison off the team so that someone else could play.
That is horrible. She deserve to be there just as much as anyone else.
Yeah, but she's am terrible at soccer.
So what? She's trying your best.
I'll give her another shot in the next game.
I know that Addison is one of our best players.
If you take her out we might lose.
I know, but I think everyone deserves to get some playing time.
If you think it is best for the team.
Have faith in your teammates that they can pull through.
It is best that we all get some experience on the field.
Wow, I smashed out my sales goal for the month!
You're such a great asset to the team. Why was your goal so low?
Due to decrease in sales for the last year. So we reduce our goals.
That is a good enough reason I guess.
I'm still getting commissions, but they are reduced by 80%.
That's so high!
I wasn't feeling so great this month so I lowered the sales goal.
Never lower your sales goal, because then your team will put less effort into the work.
I know. We reached the goal without much effort.
You can create another goal for this month.
I think we will. It didn't feel like much of an accomplishment this month.
I decided to set our sales goal low for the month to increase the morale of the team.
Did they reach it?
Yes and it only took them 3 weeks instead of the full 4 weeks.
Well I hope that works because they were falling behind in their goals the last couple months.
I know, maybe this will help them see that they can reach their goal if they try hard enough.
If they can't reach a higher goal after this then maybe you need to let some of the workers go.
I should have set the goal a little higher.
Why, did you reach it?
Yeah, but I had set it pretty low.
Maybe raise it up for the next month?
I am going to, I reached this one with hardly no effort.
Raise it up and work harder then.
I can but wait to go to prom. I have been getting ready for 2 hours already.
You are going to be so pretty and have so much fun .
I hope so. I don't have a date. I'm just going with a group of friends, but I don't care.
You have to show me the pictures later .
I definitely will and fill you in on everything that happened.
I know it’s a long time but this was a big night for me.
Anyone who complains, it’s out of line.
That’s the type of response I want to hear.
They just don’t know the meaning of that night. You need enough time to look perfect for your prom.
Exactly it’s too trivial to them.
This is one of those nights we never forget.
I cant believe it took a long time to get ready and such.
Yeah it took you over two hours, I was waiting for you twiddling my thumbs.
I promise that this wont happen again
I hope not.  You are the reason why we are really late
Yeah I am sorry.
It's okay.
I liked going to Sydney's house better than your house.
Well, Sydney doesn't like you anymore and now I don't either.
Why doesn't Sydney like me!?
Because you were greedy and you broke a bunch of her cool new toys. She said you are not welcome at her house ever again.
That's fine! I didn't want to go back to Sydney's house anyone.
Yes, you do. You are the worst.
I had a play date at Sydney's house.
Sydney house is fun to play at.
Yes, Sydney has so many toys and I enjoyed the toy too much!
I will have to catch up with Sydney soon too.
Sydney invited me to his home for a play date. I had a great time.
I bet he has some great toys.
Yes, I think I might've had too much fun with his toys.
I feel like I missed a lot there.
Sydney's house was like walking into Legoland, just toys everywhere!
That sounds like heaven! Did you guys play a lot?
Yeah, we were literally playing all night long.
Sounds like you may have enjoyed it a bit too much.
Never too much!
Can you tell Sydney to invite me too next time?
I need to find space for my latest trophy. It is the biggest one I have.
What did you win?
I entered the local karate championship tournament for men under 19-years-old.
What place did you get?
I got first place, again. I am officially the undefeated champion in young men's karate in San Rodeo.
Congratulations. I guess we will need to find room for your giant trophy.
I am so excited, I can't believe I won another contest! I am the undefeated champion!
Me too! I am so happy for you!
It feels so good to be the champion.
What do you want to do to celebrate?
Let's go get a few beers and a pizza.
Sounds great, my treat.
I thought I was going to lose after the 5th round.
That was one hell of match between you both.
When he came with that last jab, I saw by chance to knock him out.
You've got to take a opening, when you find one.
I can still say that I am the undefeated champion.
No one is going to take my belt!
You won last week?
Didn't even lose one round.
Wow man, you're a power house.
I know man, training's paid off.
I got to see one of your fights soon.
Lee had it coming, he was pushing his luck.
You bent his eyes and now he's unable to see out of one of them well.
Should teach him not to mess with me.
Anyways, why are you here again?
I'm here because I have a long list of complaints.
Got it. Thank you so much but I don’t care.
I have a problem with how things have been handled at work lately.
I heard you had your lunch stolen last week and they found out who did it.
I can't believe Lee stole my lunch even after we had a meeting, I bent his eye. And that was only the first of complaints.
Damn, sounds like you have a lot of issues that need sorting out.
Indeed I do.
Aubrey is never going to cross me against after what I did to her.
I almost don't want to ask! You have quite a temper when someone wrongs you.
Let's just say Aubrey felt my wrath and won't soon forget it.
Yikes, that doesn't sound good. But at least Aubrey learned a lesson not to mess with you.
I'm so excited!! I rocked that audition and got into the band!
Nice!! I guess your practicing payed off huh?
It sure did! I got every chord right on I didn't mess up once.
That's awesome. So when do you start playing with the band?
Next week is our first practice! I can't wait
I'm so jealous, that sounds like so much fun
I struck every chord on the guitar just right. I did well.
i told you you're a very good guitar player but you just wouldn't accept the fact. Congrats on getting in the band!
I knew the moment I got accepted into the band, I didn't believe in myself before that.
It's really good to know you're a member of a band now friend.
I am getting so sick of Aubrey's attitude!
What attitude?
She's always rolling her eyes at me, thankfully after giving her an ultimatum she stopped.
Maybe that's exactly what she needed.
I think so, she's the type of person who likes to see how many buttons she can push.
Just act like adults from now on, ok?
I'm sick of Aubrey, even though she's lost the attitude a bit in recent weeks.
She's a very temperamental person.
I don't know if I can deal with it.
Just give her another chance, she's not that bad.
Fine.
If she does it again, let me know.
There's this super cool person living next door to me now. I really want to meet her.
Who is it?
Remy the artist.
The famous Remy?
Yes. I am trying to get to know her. It would be so cool to be her friend.
You live next door so I am sure you'll develop a relationship.
I found out that Remy moved next door to me.
Did you greet her?
I made her a basket of cookies.
That was very neighbourly of you.
I really want to be friends with Remy. Maybe I'll ask her to come over and watch movies with me.
She will probably accept your offer. She loves watching movies.
Hi friend, I went to the store this morning. I bought eggs and milk. I put the eggs in the fridge, but I just discovered I forgot to put the milk in.
Oh wow, it's 11 p.m. now, you're just going to throw the milk out, right?
Actually, there are lots of recipes that call for sour milk, so... Yeah.
What?! That milk has been out of the fridge for hours and hours!
Look on YouTube, lots of recipes use sour milk. For example: pancakes, muffins, even cake!
No thanks, I'll pass, but let me know what recipe you decide to use. I hope it doesn't make you sick! Later!
I had to go to the store this morning to get some eggs and milk.
Was that all you needed to make the cake?
Yeah, I used up all the milk put had a few eggs left that I put in the fridge.
Oh, we can make some scrambled eggs in the morning!
Now that that's all done, I could sure go for something to eat.
You want me to whip something up?
Well, with the latest grocery purchases, we are fully stocked for the moment.
Now that you bought milk and eggs, I can make some French toast if you're interested.
It's like you're reading my mind.
That, or the fact that you've been crying about wanting French toast for the last few days.
Did you see how mad our teacher was when I handed in the paper late?
I think she sprouted a new vein on her head.
I turned in the paper at least, so what if it was late?
You better be careful now, I think if you mess up again she's going to have you expelled.
Yeah you're right.
Just stay low for a while. Don't mess up.
I am really in trouble in that class.  My grade is low.  I just turned in my paper late so that's not going to help the situation.
Doesn't sound like it.  Why did you turn in your paper late?
I have been too busy and tired working my two jobs. I'm getting evicted if I can't make rent.
That's tough.
It is. It's been very stressful between work and school. I barely sleep and I am still behind.
Have you talked to your teachers?
I turned in the paper but it was late and the teacher was mad.
Do you think he will dock a letter grade from it?
Probably because that is his policy.
It is only the first paper of the year so don't worry too much.
It is hard not to worry when it is my last semester of school forever.
I know but just keep your head up.
Hey Jordan what is going on. Is there something wrong.
No, nothing wrong, I just want to talk to you
Ok but you look like there is something on your mind.
Nothing, is going on but I just want to give you a hug
I noticed Jordan was trying to make a move on me and I got really weirded out.
So what did you do next?
I decided to just take my friend group and move to another part of the bar.
That was a good idea, did he stop?
Eventually he did stop but it was so weird.
He was probably just really drunk and out of it.
Uh oh Jordan is coming this way.
Maybe he just wants to say hi.
No, he's got that look in his eyes. He wants more than to just say hi.
Do you want me to leave?
No! I finally got over him and am not going to give in. Stay here please.
Alright. If things get weird I'll make an excuse for us to leave.
I got a new sweater in the mail today.
Let me guess, it's for the dog and not you.
How did you know?
You love that dog more than anything and she has a bigger wardrobe than you.
She can't go for a walk in the park with out having a new outfit on.
I know, she is the prettiest girl on four legs when she's out walking because of you.
I love my dog so much.
I can tell.
Did you see the funny sweater I bought it?
Yeah I saw you two in the park. It was great.
Yeah, she is the cutest little thing.
Agreed, it is a cute dog.
I put a Santa sweater on the dog today for our walk to the park.
Don't people laugh when they see you?
Yes and the dog loves it. She starts to get excited now to dress up!
I guess a lot of dog lovers want to stop and see it.
I do meet a lot of people and I saw another dog walker with a sweater on hers too!
It looks like you started a trend. I will get one for my dog too. They can walk together at the park tomorrow.
You know how much it snowed last night.
Yes, I think it was about two feet.
Well, when I got ready to go to work the car was snowed in.
That doesn't surprise me.
I had to shovel the driveway to get out.
I hope you got to work on time.
I spent so much time doing my makeup and searching for my uniform, only to find out I was snowed in.
It snowed last night, how did you get to work in the end?
I used the shovel to clear the driveway.
So did you mess up all your makeup?
Yeah, my work uniform was soaked too! At least I made it on time.
That's commitment right there.
I had to shovel the driveway this morning.
That's a pain. I'm lucky I didn't have to go into work today.
I was totally dressed and had to trudge out there in a skirt and push snow off the car. Why didn't you have to work?
I have been working from home a few days a week, and got lucky this week.
That is lucky. I didn't even know it had snowed until I opened the door to leave. It must have come down lightly all night.
It did. I didn't go to sleep until about 2am, and it had been going for about an hour then.
I talked to my boyfriend and told him it was time to move in together.
And how did he take it?
He liked the idea that way we can both save money on rent.
Yes, I agree, you make such a great couple, congrats.
Thanks, yeah I love him very much.
Hope everything works out for you guys.
I'm really frustrated by my kids these days.
Your kids are such angels though!
They're not at all, compared to Kendall's kids.
What are Kendall's kids like?
They're so well-behaved I didn't believe they were five and eight. I asked her how old they were and she confirmed it.
Well, I'm sure her kids act up sometimes too.
I can't believe how well Kendall's kids were acting.
That is crazy. What did you do?
I asked what ages where her kids were, because they were as well behaved as adults honestly.
Kendall must be a really good parent.
I was surprised how well Kendall's kids behaved.
Are they very calm for their age?
I had to ask their ages. The oldest one was four.
That does seem like a young age to start listening to directions.
They don't seem to be disturbed by anything.
I remember trying to eat my toys at that age.
I finally start my new job Monday!
How long have you been out of work for?
I've been unemployed for six months. I can't wait to get back.
I bet you'll be so excited to be making money again.
I have shopping lists already prepped actually.
That's going to be a lot of fun once you've started.
I just got home from a business meeting.
Isn't it a little late for that?
The meeting was scheduled for 10 p.m. but I had to be there regardless.
Your work sounds very demanding.
It can be quite exhausting.
I hope it is rewarding to you.
I'm went to the meeting yesterday.
The business one at 9am, I assume?
No, it was at 10pm
Oh wow, that is insane.
I know, there was nothing else going on.
You are overworking yourself.
I'm exhausted from staying up too late last night.
Were you watching Netflix?
No, I had a really late business meeting that started at 10pm.
That's insane, doesn't anyone care about work life balance?
No, my boss has unreasonable expectations.
You should look for a new job!
I am so tired this morning, the meeting was at 10pm last night.
Why was the business meeting so late?
The client could only friend in at that hour. He was already booked during the day
Let me know if you need to take a break today.
I'm not playing soccer, I prefer playing football.
But football season is over.
I hate soccer, I am absolutely useless at it.
Let's just play, you will love it.
Ok, I'll give it a try just for you.
Let's go!
I will be glad when it is football season again!
You just need to give soccer a chance, It is just as fun.
I like being able to tackle people, soccer is a less physical game. I hate it!
It is a game of skill, just like football.
I am so sad that football season is over.
You really should play soccer though.
I don't like soccer at all, I am terrible at it.
Maybe I can practice with you.
That is okay, I will just have to suck it up and wait for football season to start back again.
Suit yourself then, I did offer.
What a bummer that football season is over, it's my favourite sport.
Soccer games are still going on, you can always do that.
I hate soccer, it's too boring and dull.
I agree, I don't know why so many people like it.
Because they've never tried real football before.
Once you play football there's no substitute.
So now football season is over. I'm going to teach you something about me.
What is that?
I loved playing football and can't stand soccer.
Ok but what's wrong with soccer? It's the most popular sport in the world.
Riley made me tidy up her apartment before going out.
She's so bossy.
I know. I did get payback on her though.
Uh oh. What you do?
I quickly dusted the furniture then shoved all the clothes under the bed. I then got myself ready in a rush.
I can picture you riding to do your hair.
I was cleaning Riley’s apartment.
What exactly did he need help with?
I was dusting his furniture quick, but I was running out of time.
You could have just put his dirty laundry under the bed?
I did. I needed to fix my hair and get ready in a rush.
Did you make it in time then?
I have been to 4 stores and can't find that hairspray.
Go to the one on 9th, they had it last week.
I just left one and that is when I ran into you. I think the one up on 27th has it.
Hop in, I will drive you up there, so you don't have the bus.
Man it sucks when you've got to search for something you want.
I've been there man. What happened?
So I had this hair product that I wanted. Visited the first store but couldn't find it. Then went searching for another store. I'm not sure but I think this store might have it.
Oh well, I wish you luck. I know it's sometimes challenging find certain product.
Thanks.
There is a great store that has a bunch of hair products.
Did you manage to find what you were looking for?
Well I went in there and as I got to the aisle I saw another person grab the last bottle. Truly heart breaking.
Oh really? That sucks!
I think there might be another store that sells it.
Good luck.
I need a particular hair product.
Have you found it yet?
I visited a nearby store but had no luck.
Have you continued the search?
I think there is another store that has the product.
I hope you are successful in your search.
So, I have this exciting new opportunity for young entrepreneurs. I got my friends together and pitched it to them.
Why would you pitch to your friends?
I needed to practice for the real pitch, which is going on Monday.
I suppose you don't want to get there and be unprepared.
Yeah, at the end of the day this business is my life. I can't let myself down.
Well good luck, Bailey.
Addison almost got on that rickety ladder left next to the house.
Oh my gosh, kids have to be watched so much.
She was just about to step up and I was able to grab her arm and push her aside.
Did anything happen?
The ladder shifted and almost fell but no one got hurt.
You have to remove it before someone does get harmed.
I couldn't let Addison climb that piece of trash ladder. If she fell I couldn't forgive myself. I pushed her away the moment she tried.
You are quite a man. I can tell you really like her.
I do like her but if anybody is going to get hurt painting my house, it will be me.
I understand. You need to buy a decent ladder since it is obvious she wants to help you.
I will get a new one tonight.
Good. You can't stop someone that wants to work.
Did you confirm with the florist that the flowers would arrive on the night before?
Yes, Riley. And I also confirmed with the chair and table guy that he would set everything up the morning of.
The morning of? Will that be enough time? The wedding is at 1pm.
Yes, he said it was plenty of time. Calm down.
I can't calm down. It is my wedding day. Everything must be perfect.
Nothing can be perfect, Riley. You've turned from being over-prepared to a monster.
There is a lot of great things happening today and I think that overall I need to calm down
Yeah you for sure need to relax.  It is your wedding day and you need to be happy for that.
Agreed there is a lot of stuff that I think I am overpreparing for
Yeah there most certainly is, I've never seen you this excited and stressed.
I think that sometimes I am overdoing it and I am just afraid to get something wrong
That's understandable. I think you will be okay though
I've been teaching my class about nutrition.
Are they receptive to learning about nutrition?
So far they have been. Every week I bring in a new vegetable for them to try.
You get kids to eat vegetables? Miraculous.
I have, and they are starting to be more focused during class so it's working.
Then maybe you need to bring vegetables everyday.
I had so much fun the other day helping to teach children about nutrition.
How did you manage that?
Well, I brought in new foods for them to try.
You actually got them to eat healthy food?
I did. And I think it will help their health in the long run.
Wow. Good for you. I thought it was impossible to get kids to eat anything other than junk food!
We finally got that guy who's been terrorizing the local businesses.
Oh that's fantastic news! The neighbourhood will be relieved.
Yeah hopefully we can get a conviction. I spent months tracking him down.
Who made the arrest?
I got Sydney to arrest him this morning.
Congratulations! You're a great detective!
I am really proud of how well I did this semester.
What was your final grade?
I got a 4.0 for the semester!
Wow! A perfect score, congratulations!
Thank you! I am so happy.
I got great grades growing up.
That is awesome, good for you.
What are your plans?
I was going to ask you that?
I'm going to continue being studious and working hard.
That's so great.
How have you been doing with your grades?
I have been getting straight Bs.
That is not too bad, but not as good as my straight As.
I am very happy for you that you have gotten straight As, but the way you said it sounded a bit off putting.
I did not mean to come across that way at all.
Okay, maybe I am being too sensitive then.
Good thing I looked at the map and memorized the route before I drove.  I took a right and that was the correct route.
You are so organized and good with maps.
I think maps are fascinating.
I still don't know how to read a map.
You don't really need to these days.  That's what GPS is for.
That's very true.  I rarely get lost now.
I can't believe I found the place on memory alone!
You didn't get help from any navigation system?
Not this time. I have a very organized mind, so it's easy for me to remember routes and directions even if I've only been there once before.
I'm glad you made the right turn and didn't end upon the interstate going the opposite direction.
We took that trip to the mountains last weekend.
Did you end up getting lost, those roads are tricky.
No, I remembered to take that right. I didn't even have to use GPS this time.
You have always been organized, that stuff just comes natural to you.
I can't help you get lost in a paper bag!
Oh, man. I can't believe I just did that.
What happened?
You remember me telling you about my Vegas trip?
I remember your trip. You were talking about gambling.
I got carried away, gambled all of my family's money and lost it.
That's horrible.
Dude! I m so in trouble right now.
What's up Alex, what did you do? First of all where have you been?
I have been in Las Vegas for the last two week, the casinos looked so attractive man!
By that what do you mean?
I might have blown all my family money in one of the casinos
What! You are sick, how could you even think of gambling your family money?
My experience in Las Vegas was very bad
What happened?
I lost all of my family's money
Oh that is sad.
I know, I felt very bad.
I'm really sorry, that's a terrible blow.
I just got back from Vegas.
That must have been fun.
Not really. I just lost all my family's money.
How did you even do that?
I was able to use their bank cards?
No, I meant what casino games are you bad at?
I was just so excited to get home!
Well, no need to throw the door open!
It was a long day at work.
I'm glad you're home, but save the air conditioning and close it up.
Fine, how was your day?
It was long too.
I had a long day at work.
They all seem that way to me.
Today was especially difficult and I could not wait to get home.
That is a normal reaction.
I rushed through traffic and when I arrived home I threw open the door.
I hope your air conditioning was working.
Hey friend, how are you?
I am fine thank you, how are you?
I am good too, you know I met my co- worker and I knew him very well.
That's very nice.
We worked together for many years.
Nice, it's good for you then.
I'm really going to miss working with my co-worker.
How long have you two worked together?
He was here when I came to the company fifteen years ago.
That is a long time to work with somebody every day.
He's been a great team member and I will miss his sense of humour.
I am sure that he will really miss you too.
You know, I knew that co-worker for like ten years. We worked together on so many projects.  It's no wonder our last collaboration worked out so well!
Well it really did, I've been told that it was the best that has ever been seen.
Oh my God, really?  I didn't know that was actually said.
Yeah, you can tell that you and your co-worker really had great synergy.
That makes me so proud.  I know that the co-worker has got to be pleased with the results, too.
Hopefully you'll work together again in the future.
Hi, how was work today? My day went very smooth thanks to my co-worker.
Work today was same as usual, lots of sales, who is this co-worker?
He's my work husband. We've known each other a long time and are close friends.
Your work husband?
Yeah! It's like a nickname we give in the office when you've worked with someone from day one.
That's cool! This year let's do a big birthday for him.
Ash's essay has go to be one of the best I've ever seen in my career.
That girl is so bright, she'll definitely end up at a top college one day.
Me and another teacher gave him personal compliments, because it was just that good.
A little praise can really go a long way you know.
I'm hoping that he she will take it on board.
Keep giving her the right amount of praise and I'm sure she will.
I'm so proud of Ash, but honestly that guy is such a nerd.
He got like the perfect score for that essay right?
Yeah, I had no choice but to congratulate him.
Was that when we were in class?
Yeah, the teacher complimented his work ethic too.
Must be a nice feeling.
I brought some kids at the shelter juice the other day.
That was so nice of you, do you volunteer there often?
Yes I go at least twice per week.
What kind of juice did you buy them?
I got a bunch of Kool-Aid and orange juice.
I am sure they will like it.
I went to visit my grandchildren today.
Oh, that's wonderful. How are they doing?
They are great and big as ever.
They do grow up fast.
I brought them their favourite juice. I was worried they had outgrown it.
Well, some things never change.
I just got home from a weekend visit.
Where did you go this time?
I was at the school giving my talk to the children. I love seeing them.
Did you do anything fun with them?
We went to a park and I bought them fresh squeezed juice from the farmer's market.
I bet that juice was very refreshing since it was so hot this weekend.
Okay so I took this new approach with my kids and I got them to gather round.
Oh no, did they misbehave?
Yes, I gave them a speech as I need them to understand that what they did was wrong.
Damn that's some harsh method.
Sometimes you just have to get straight to the point, or they won't listen.
Very true.
My kids were complaining!
So what did you tell them?
I just got to the point. I just wanted them to know why they were in trouble!
Ok! you have done a great job by telling them!
I know I can be picky, but the ideas that my friends suggested were just not my vibe.
So did you agree to anything?
No, I just laid in bed watching tv and eating ice cream.
Skylar, you're going to regret this when you're older.
Meh, I don't know. I'm quite comfortable doing my own thing.
And be careful because you might lose friends.
I just don't like any of the ideas they came up with.
They have tried their best to come up with something new and fresh.
But all of their ideas are bad.  I want something original.
Look Skylar, it's not like I've seen you make any suggestions.
It's because they will just turn it down, so what's the point.
I wanted to go to the beach with my friends, but they just kept suggesting terrible ideas.
Sometimes you just have to compromise, that's part of friendship.
I personally disagree.
Well you watch, you're going to lose your friends if you keep acting this way
Oh well, they never want to do what I want anyway.
Stop acting selfish, Skylar.
So I told them all no.
You didn't like any of their ideas?
They weren't so much ideas as they were excuses for me to give them money.
So you didn't think they were serious?
None of them even had a presentation. They just pitched me off the top of their head.
Well it sounds like they may not be ideal business partners.
Jan was my teacher and handed me a test.  She made me start.
Were all the tests given out yet?
I think I was the first one she gave the test to, she must really hate me.
That makes sense.
I thought I had to wait so I just sat there for a minute with the test faced down.
You were being a good student.
I feel like I did very well today on the test.
That’s awesome! Did you study well?
Absolutely! I want to make Jan proud of me, she’s a wonderful teacher.
You are like a teacher’s pet.
I wish! I want to be Jan’s favourite student. She made me start today, so I guess it's a good sign.
Keep up the great work, and you will.
Did you study?
Yea, I did, for like 4 hours yesterday.
Oh, Jan was handing out the test and I really wasn't expecting to go first.
I'm sure you did better than you think, that's usually the case.
Thanks for the encouragement.
Not a problem.
I'm a little scared about taking this test I took, since I didn't study for it
I'm sure you will do alright since you always do well on tests.
yea, but there were a few things I wanted to look at before submitting.
That sucks, why didn't you have enough time?
Well, Jan made me start and it took me off guard.
Stay positive, I'm sure you've done well.
Sorry, I was taking my dog for a walk.
You have a dog? Since when?
I bought a new dog from the pet store last weekend.
What's the dog's name?
I haven't decided yet, maybe you could help me.
I cant wait to take my new dog out for another walk and show him off
He is such a cute dog too. Maybe you'll make friends too when people want to chat with you.
That could be an idea. Maybe I could take him to the park
I'm sure he would love to go to the park and run around for awhile, when I first got him I took him to the forest and he didn't seem that excited.
Yeah doesn't sound like somewhere a puppy would feel comfortable.
I'm so stressed, Aubrey will decide if my thesis is approved or not soon.
What is your thesis on?
I have focused on Keynesian economics, since I believe that there is a valid argument to re-introduce his way of thinking in our corrupt economic system.
Oh wow, those are some really strong opinions you know.
Yeah, but from an academic perspective it's what you want. To really provoke the reader.
Best of luck to you, Kai.
So I think my PhD project is going to get approved by my advisor Aubrey.
Oh man that is awesome, you've been working so long on that.
Yeah, over a year and it is almost 80 pages long.
So when do you have to present it?
I think I do that in a month, they give us time to prepare our presentations for it.
I would be so nervous doing something like that, good luck to you man.
My thesis means the world to me, I've been waiting hours for the final verdict but I think Aubrey is still getting ready to approve it or not.
You're probably the smartest person I know Kai, I'm sure you will ace it.
I hope so, I've worked too hard to be turned down.
Plus I read part of what you wrote and it was very interesting.
I know, but it's not about that.
Well, let me know how it goes.
I don't know why I kept putting off signing the permission slips for the kid's field trip next week.
Do you think maybe you just didn't want them to go?
I guess I am a little concerned that it's an overnight trip.
Did you consider chaperoning?
I did, but my kids did not like that idea.  I think they wanted to get away from me for a bit!
I'm sure it will be fine and they'll have a great time.
My kids needed a permission slip today and I didn't know about it!
Oh no, why?
Well, my kids didn't give it to me until today.
Did it get turned in at least?
Yes, because I found it crumpled up in the bottom of the bookbag. I got it in literally last minute.
What a relief!
I finally got their permission slips sent back to the school.
I bet you are the last parent to get them turned in Jesse!
I know, it just slipped my mind with everything else going on.
I am sure the school understands.
Yeah, well my kids don't. They have been riding me for 2 weeks about signing them so they don't miss the field trip!
What do you expect, they are kids and they been stuck in the house for months now. They are ready to go somewhere, anywhere!
I had to run once I got to the middle of the street.
Was there a car coming?
There was a truck that was coming right towards me.
I'm glad you were able to make it across safely.
I’m glad as well since I got to see you.
Next time you have to be careful when crossing the street.
I almost got hit by a speeding truck today.
Oh my God! What happened?
I was crossing in the crosswalk and out of nowhere a truck appeared going way too fast.
Did you get hurt? I hope you called the cops.
I ran and the truck missed me by inches. One of the witnesses got the plate number and called the cops.
Hopefully they find him and give him a ticket or something.
Kai accidentally hit me with a ball.
Where were you hit?
I was hit right by my back, one last time.
That must hurt really bad.
I looked straight in Kai’s eyes to warn him.
I hope he got the message.
That hurt so much, Kai has a very strong throw.
Yeah, he needs to watch out or he'll end up injuring everyone
I get that he's competitive but it's not about that here, we're playing to have fun.
You should tell him.
I gave him a very stern look, I think that he got the message.
I'll tell him off if he keeps playing so aggressively.
I went over to Bailey's house last night for our first date.
How did it go?
Great, she cooked us a delicious roasted duck with a bunch of sides.
Wow, duck is hard to cook, right?
I know, I was so impressed, I would have never tried that.
Especially for a first date, she must really like you to have done that.
I was so impressed with Bailey's cooking!
What did she make for dinner?
She made a delicious roast duck with all the fixings.
Wow, that is fancy! I think she was trying to impress you.
Well it worked! It tasted better than a restaurant.
I wish my girlfriend still cooked fancy stuff like that for me!
I wonder how my students behave at home. They were so belligerent in class today.
What kind of things were they saying?
They are disrespectful, cursing at one another and cursing at me.
Did you send them to the office?
I gave them detention and I will be calling their parents. The next step is suspension.
I wonder too what their home life must be like.
Sometimes I wonder why I wanted to teach school. My kids today were just awful.
You have a difficult age, teenagers.
Yes, I know but they just test my soul. I gave some of the students detention with a promise of more if they continued.
Hopefully, it will help.
I had such a wonderful summer vacation. I wish it wasn't over.
What did you do for your summer vacation?
I went to camp. We swam and played games and just had fun. But now it's time to get back to college.
The summer does always seem to fly by! Fall comes so quickly.
Exactly. I have to trade all of my shorts and shirts for fall clothing. But I will always remember my great vacation.
Yes, you will always keep those memories. You can think of them while in your college classes.
I'm already missing summer vacation and it hasn't even ended yet.
It's coming to an end shortly though.
Yes, and I'll be going back to college in the fall.
How do you feel about that?
No matter how good my summer vacation was, everything will change when it's over.
You're depressing me, Quinn.
It's been a great summer vacation.
So, now back to college.
Yes, sophomore year.
Are you looking forward to it?
Yes, freshman year was hard, but I think it will be better this year.
Well, I'll still be bagging groceries.  Look forward to seeing you next break.
It's taken a lot of blood and sweat to get here, to sit upon the throne.
You were a fearless leader.
We are victorious. We defeated the enemy during the hard won war.
Victory is bittersweet.
Every victory is. There's a winner and a loser.
We won but we also lost a lot of our people.
We have finally claimed the throne.
It was a hard fight indeed. You were a great leader and history will be kind to you.
Now, it is time for rest. The war is over!
I will set up a celebratory feast for tomorrow.
The people should be happy that the tyrant is dead. We need that feast!
I will arrange it for all.
The war was brutal but I'm glad its over now
Peace has come to the land for ages to come, thanks to you!
Thank you, but peace is only temporary. In the meantime I will enjoy sitting up on the throne.
You deserve it, Tracy.
I'm getting ready for a date. Any suggestions?
Wear something comfortable and classy. Who is going with you?
I just met this lovely lady at the library. Her name is Rea.
Good for you. She just might be the one.
She just might. We really hit it off once we met.
I was at the Library today! I met with lovely Rea.
Your crush?
Yes! I asked her out and we agreed, we immediately hit it off.
Oh! Are you preparing for the date now?
Yes! It is today, I am getting ready!
I wish you luck
This girl I met, Rea, whom I met at the library is so lovely.  It was so easy to talk to her.
Did you ask her out?
I did and she agreed.  I need to go home and get ready for our date.
Where are you guys going?
There's an art exhibit that she talked about.  We are going to check that out.
That sounds like a good time.
I was trying to get the others' attention today but they were rolling a ball back and forth till I stopped it.
What did you do?
I stayed quiet until they were all watching, then I stepped forward and put one finger on it to stop it moving.
I bet that got their attention!
They were so focused on the ball that when they saw me with it, they all looked at me and I was able to speak.
That was a good way to handle a distraction like that.
I was trying to get the attention of others but they ignored.
That's fond of them if they are playing football.
I had to put my finger on the ball so it wouldn't move.
Funny you.
I hate nonsense.
You are not messing around.
I needed to stop what they were doing so that they could pay attention.
Why did you stop the ball?
They were too distracted with that game and they weren't listening to me. I knew it was a bad idea to give the others a ball during their break.
What's the big deal?
We had a work deadline to finish! If they kept playing the game, we would have been late for sure.
Robin, you're so stern with them.
After everything we've been through, I know I meant a lot to Sasha.
What have you guys been through?
We were held hostage for several years but together we were able to get away.
Wow! I hope you guys remain friends.
I hope so too but her family lives across the country.
This is the reason the internet was created.
Sasha really cares about me. It really shows after all the difficult times we've been together on.
It’s about time you saw that.
It’s just hard for me to think that other people love me that way.
I don’t know why, you’re just an amazing person and easy to love.
That’s very kind of you to say.
I hope that you were able to see this in people more often now that you found out about Sasha.
I hath vanquished my greatest adversary, the mighty Quinn!
That is pretty strong language, don't you think?
On the contrary!  I waged war against my foe on the field of battle, and I was victorious!.
What are you, Shakespeare?
Do not mock me, or I will smite thee for thine arrogance!
OK, Riley. That's enough video games for you today.  Why don't you go take a victory lap outside and dispose of thine trash while you are at it?
I decorated the Christmas tree, but it's fair to say it looks like a mess.
Oh no, you should take care of your Christmas tree.
I don't really care about it too much, my friends were playing football and I couldn't resist.
So you got it finished really quickly?
Yeah, the ribbon is all over the place and the lights are so uneven. But at least it's up!
You could always fix the tree later.
I'm going to play football!
The tree is so sloppy
You are horrible. I tried my best.
You should finish it properly.
Ok, I will maybe finish it after I'm done with football.
Fine, sounds good.
I did a sloppy decorating job on the Christmas tree.
Why didn't you just do it right?
Well, I was in a rush because I wanted to play football with my friends.
I think if you just spent a bit more time, it wouldn't have looked so bad.
I know. Next time I won't make that mistake again.
That's good. Also, let me know and I could help you out.
Got to get this over this, I hate dealing with Christmas traditions. That's why my tree looks rubbish and I decided to play football instead of making sure it looks good.
It sure does look funny. Did you get to play with your friends?
Yeah, we had a game of football and it was great. My team won by a massive margin.
Good, that should give you motivation to fix that pathetic excuse of a tree.
The fish I bought was out of my budget.
And why did you buy it then?
Because extra guests are arriving to the dinner party tonight.
Oh I see, that's one of the negative points of throwing a party.
Tell me about it, but who cares, parties are fun.
You're right, and it's not like you throw parties every week.
These fish were so expensive!
Fish is usually cheap though.
I know, but they increased the price due to the trade war!
That stinks. I would've bought something else.
I had to go to the fishmongers to get a quote on the amount of fish that we needed.
Did you get a fair price from them?
It wasn't a decent price but I can’t really shop around.
Why not?
I just don’t have the time to put everything together.
That’s understandable, I guess you’ll just have to stick with whatever you get from them.
I went shopping for the dinner party today.
Oh good. How did it go?
It was okay although I was a bit surprised by the price of the fish.
Were they expensive?
Yes very much so and I need them for the dinner tonight.
Well I hope that you were able to figure it out.
I want to get a haircut from a great hairdresser.
I know someone who is a great hairdresser, Austin.
Glad to hear that, could you tell me the name of her shop and where I can find her?
Sure, the name is Addison and she is just across the next street.
Oh this is nice, i will go there and get a hair cut from her. Thanks.
You are welcome Austin, Take care.
Addison is a great hairdresser.
Why do you say that.
I went to her for haircut and she cut my hair short and it looks so good.
That's great, I will go to her next time I want to cut my hair too.
I was making a birthday cake, and realized that I was out of milk.
Did you have to go to the store.
Yes, but I tried to knocked on old man Dangles door, but he was not home.
Next time you are at time store buy some of that evaporated kind, it lasts forever.
That's a good idea.
I made a cake today that I hope turns out right.
Why are you worried about it?
I ran out of milk in the middle of it and had to let it sit while I went to the store.
I'm sure it's fine if it was just a mix.
I wasn't gone long so when it finishes baking I'll find out.
Let me know how it tastes !
I should have checked all the ingredients before I started the cake.
You always have milk, what happened today?
I had cereal for breakfast and used all the milk.
I've done that. That is why I always keep a can of evaporated milk in the panty.
That is smart of you. I'll get some of that too while I'm at the store.
Get two cans. You are always baking.
I was lucky the milk was only 3 dollars.
Wow, it went down in price.
I'm happy that I finished the cake.
I need a piece of it.
Sorry, I ate the whole thing, I was so hungry and it tasted so nice.
You are so greedy!
I was trying to finish the project a week earlier so we can save money. I knew I could get push back from the group.
That's sounds like it's moving the timeline up a lot.
It would be difficult to get everything done, but I felt like if we put in an extra hour a day we could do it.
That's still a lot of pressure.
The group has been working overtime already.  I knew it was too much to ask.
Your job is to make sure projects stay within budget so I can see why you suggested working longer days.
I knew it would be hard but it had to be done.
What are you talking about?
I had to close the shop and tell people not to come to work today.
Did you have a good reason for doing that?
I told the workers that we had to close for a short time to make things safer.
That's smart, and surely for the best.
I made a proposal to the group.
How did they react?
Knowing I would get push back, I first explained the action in detail.
Was there push back?
There certainly was and I proceeded to I justify the reason for my action to the rest of the group.
You were able to make your point.
My vision was getting so blurry, I finally went to the optician, today
Good, you should have done that a month ago, what did he say
He said I needed to wear glasses full time, he gave me some cool looking red glasses to try
How do they feel on your face, do you like them
They are going to take some getting used to but I have to do it
Well they look marvellous and it is doctors orders!
I had the time of my life!
Was the orchestra any good?
They were breathtakingly amazing!
That's cool!  Did they play any songs you knew?
Yes!  They made Itsy Bitsy Spider sound amazing!
That's great, you should take me next time!
I had a great time watching the orchestra play.
That was a good concert.
I watched our friends play so well.
He was glad to see us.
You're right. I saw his smile while on stage.
The concert was beautiful!
I can't go away this weekend because I am taking Casey somewhere.
OK, where is Casey going?
Casey is going to show at the AKC this weekend.
That is cool. How did you get connected with AKC?
A co-worker told me about it after I showed him a picture of Casey.
Let me know how it goes. I'd love to go with you.
I have a really busy weekend coming up.
What do you have planned for this weekend?
I have scheduled Casey, my dog, to show at the AKC this weekend.
Do you think you guys will win?
I hope so, we have spend a lot of time preparing.
I wish you the best of luck! I'm sure you guys will do great!
I am going to be showing my dog at the AKC today.
I didn't know that your dog was registered.
Yes, I registered him when he was born.
What kind of dog is he?
He is a lab.
Those are well behaved dogs.
I feel so much better after working out, and I think I can get a good night's sleep
I bet you will since you look really tired
I worked out for about two hours and did some stretches after
I am sure you will fall right to sleep
I am sure I will
the aerobics are great and I think that overall they are relaxing
they most definitely are.  I think they are a big hit in my opinion
yes, I agree, they are good
indeed they are, what's your favorite aerobic to do?
The full body workouts and such.  they are great
Ill have to check that out for sure
Wow, that was a breeze. I feel guilty about how easy it was.
Sash, you can't feel guilty because you're smart.
Well, I do read this stuff for fun. I am obsessed with linear algebra.
I know. I asked you to play PS4, but you just had to do some linear algebra.
You know they use linear algebra in programming video games.
Really, oh please teach me some linear algebra!
I aced the test.  I knew the answers based on my experiences.
That's great.  You never really study and somehow always does well.
I pay attention in class, so I don't need to study that much.
You don't skip class to hang out with your boyfriend, like I do.
I know my priorities.
I need to prioritize me.  I know it.
We need to cancel our meeting at the office.
Yes, Remy. There are too many Covid positive cases in the office.
I will set the meeting at home for us instead.
That's a good idea.
Let the other attendees know that we will do it at home.
 I will call them right up.
Skylar had a meeting at home instead of the office today.
Why is that?
She had to stay at home because her kid is sick.
Poor thing.
Kids have gone back to school and there's that virus going around.
I hope the kid is alrigh.
I'm so grateful to have found Austin.
I'm glad that you'll be able to stay here.
I'm glad, too.  I was so worried.
Thank you for always looking out for me, you don't have to be worried ever again.
I marry her to be able to stay in the country and get my Visa.
You knew that to stay you would have to marry her for a long time.
I just thought that I would find someone else better looking, but I realised that she is very nice.
Well, will you not divorce her in a few years.
This was my plan, but I hope we can stay a couple.
You will do what you need to do then.
Is your salad also gross?
I don't see a problem with mine.
Well mine is old , I am going to call the waiter over. Hey waiter, would you mind giving me a new salad? Thank you.
I hope they don't mess up your salad the second time.
I know, otherwise I will not be coming back.
I would not blame you for that.
Another accident on the turnpike, today. That curve near the bridge is so dangerous.
It must be. Isn't that like the third or fourth crash this week?
Yes, the fourth. Car flipped all the way over. Pulled a woman out just as it was catching fire.
Wow. She must have been happy to see you!
I was happy to see her, too, actually. Her name's Jan. We're having dinner when she's all patched up.
I'm impressed! Only you could make a love connection under those circumstances.
I'm an EMT
It is an amazing job
Yes, I love this job.
Yes that is an amazing job, and so helpful to all of us.
You saving lives help others, I really respect this typ work.
You are right, so glad you have the jon you love.
I am so glad I finally graduated. I feel so happy.
You seem a lot more relaxed.
I can finally relax a little. It's a nice change of pace.
Are you still working, too?
My last day is Saturday and then I'm taking a few weeks off before I start as an intern at Amazon.
I'm really impressed. You worked so hard.
Hey, how are you?
I am good, thank you. How are you?
I am good, too. I am feeling very happy after going there, it was a nice change of pace.
Glad to know that.
We should plan for that very often.
Sure!
This is it.
What do you mean?
Yes, this change of speed makes me feel so happy.
That's good to hear.
I took a relaxing vacation last weekend.
How did that feel?
I felt so happy and it was a nice change of pace.
Where'd you go?
I went down to the lake.
Maybe I'll go to the lake next month.
You won't believe what I did yesterday. I finally had the criminals tracked  down.
I don't believe it! That is wonderful.
I am so happy. Finally we are getting justice.
I hope they go away for a long time.
I think they will be lock up  for 30 years.
Justice is served!
I am so sad inside. I had to agree to something I never wanted to do.
What happened? Was this at work?
Yes, we are mired in debt right now. We had to move to increase the students' tuitions.
Oh no. Most of them are having a hard time as it is.
I know. I feel so guilty, I just want to go to bed and stay there for a week.
I am forced to increased the tuition fee, by the Institute.
I must be hard to be a university president.
Extremely difficult. I don't want to have to charge the students more.
As president can you just say I'm not going to do it.
The board has been pressuring me for some time now. I've held them off this long.
Then I guess you have to raise tuition.
I had a fun weekend.
What did you do?
I took my new bird shaped kite outside to the park.
Was it windy enough?
Yes, if I ran fast enough, I was able to launch it.
Lovely! Do you have any photos?
I got a bird kite for my birthday yesterday.
What did you do with it?
I ran fast and threw it into the wind.
Did it fly high?
Yes, it flew at least 50 feet into the air.
Yep, those bird kites are known for their high flying ability.
I got a new kite.
What kind of kite did you get?
I got a bird kite.
Have you tried it out?
I ran fast and threw it to the wind.
I assume all went well because you are telling me about your bird kite and your use of it.
Check out my new kite.
Wow, that is amazing. it looks just like a bird.
I know, right?
But how well does it work.
Well, it's a little hard to launch, but if you run fast and throw it, you can get it into the air.
That must look pretty cool when it's up.
Nothing like a sunny day at the beach to clear your mind.
I agree, especially now with all the hot weather.
All the sun and sand and water really took my mind off my problems.
What sort of problems do you have these days?
I have a lot of bills to pay and a tax audit to deal with.
That sounds terrible, maybe you should go to the beach everyday to relax.
Thank you for coming to the beach with me, I really needed this break!
No problem, thanks for asking me along! Have you been busy?
Too busy on top of all the other problems going on in my life right now
I'm sorry to hear that, well this beach day is exactly what you need
I can just lay back and daydream and let the problems disappear from my brain!
Let's do it! Did you bring watermelon, I'm hungry
I think this surprise party is actually going to be a success.
I hope so. You've worked so hard on it.
Yeah, it hasn't been easy. But all the pieces are in place now.
Everyone knows when and where to go? Did they all respond?
Yup, everyone's on board and things are in motion. I'm excited.
Me, too. I can't wait to see the reaction when everyone yells Surprise!
I know for sure I have got this sorted!
What is your plan for it?
I plan on leaving at 6 AM for the airport and meeting him there
Did you tell him?
Yes! I think the surprise and effort I show, will make him say yes
That does make sense
Well, I planned my husband's surprise party.
Do you think he knows? He usually finds these things out.
I did everything when he was out. There is no way he knows.
Your husband always knows. It's like your house is bugged.
If he figured this out, then I know he has hidden cameras or bugs in the house.
His birthday is never any fun. He always knows the plan ahead of time, including what you bought him.
There is something wrong with my twins.
Why don't you take them to the doctor?
I take them every week and the doctors can't figure out what is wrong.
Did you get a second opinion?
I've been looking for another doctor. Do you know anyone?
Yes, I have the perfect person. Here's the number.
There is something wrong with us. We don't feel very well.
Did you go to the Doctor?.
We have been going every week.
What did he say?
He has been running some tests, and we will find out once we get the results.
I wish you all well. I hope you all feel better soon.
Helloa Chaz, I really need your help to get my car fixed.
I am not sure Ash, you owe me money from the court fees to bail you out.
I know but if I don't get my car fixed, I will be out of a job.
Okay, I need you to set up a payment each week. I can't deal with lending money out.
I am sorry but I am in deep debt at the moment. I need your help!!
I can lend you half of it. I am broke myself. Child support is overdue.
Hey, I need to ask you for a favor?
Anything for you Ash, you've always been there for me.
I need to borrow a couple hundred dollars from you to fix my car.
That's no problem, I'll cash app it to you.
I'll have to create an account since I don't have one.
Cool, it won't take any time at all.
I've got a problem.
What's that?
My car broke down, and I need to borrow money to get it fixed.
Sure, no problem.
Thank you so much  Now I'll be able to get to work. I will set up a payment to pay it back to you
How much is it going to be?
I left Lee's dog in the park.
Did Lee leave her dog with you?
Yes!
What happened that made you forget the dog?
I think I was forgetful and I usually go to the park without a dog.
That's bad, we better find it
Oh no, I can't find Lee's dog!
What? I thought you told Lee you would look after it!
I know, but I'm so forgetful that I think I left him at the park when I took him out for a walk.
I'll drive us to the park and we'll both look for him.
Hey Lee, didn't think you'd be back this soon
Where's Rex
Oh we went to the park and 
And what? Where is he
I think he's still at the park
Why is he there? How could you forget my dog
I don't understand why she was ignoring me like that
Did you two get into a fight or something?
No, I kept calling her name, but she just ignored me
Maybe she didn't hear you. Try giving her a call tomorrow
I hope you're right about that
Yes, maybe just give her the benefit of the doubt
Guess what, next weekend, I get to head to the state championship.
Many congrats. This means you won your matches last weekend, right?
Yes, all eight.  Puts me in great position going in the state championship.
I guess all those hours we didn't get to see you because you were practicing paid off.
Yeah, those early morning and after school training sessions were tough, and I missed hanging out with you guys.
Yeah, but it paid off, all that hard work and practice means you could be the state champion next week
Patti, good to see you.
How did the tennis tournament go?
Great--I made it to the championship!
That's wonderful.
I really worked hard and practiced for it every day.
Well, it paid off.
Hey, Carson, can you help me with my lab experiment?
Sure, what class is it for?
Basic chemistry.  I've never done it and I know you guys did it last semester.
Oh, its a really easy experiment actually and fun once you get the hang of it.
That's good, the textbook is hard to follow and makes it sound difficult.
Nah they like to make sound hard in the books but its a simple process.
My god. What happened? That idiot in the truck!
Give me your hand. Let me help you out of the car.
Should I move? I could have neck issues. Shouldn't we wait for the EMT's?
The accident wasn't that bad. I think you'll be ok. Besides its more dangerous here with traffic nearby.
Okay. Lets move a safe distance away.
I can't believe Quinn saved me from the accident. I thought I was a goner when my car went off the road.
You were lucky Quinn was walking just across the street when your car went off the curb.
All I remember was him reaching out his hand to help me out of the car.
You should thanks for saving your life.
Robin was in a bad car accident yesterday.
I heard that you helped her get out of the car.
Yeah, as it was on fire and I didn't want her to be in there when it exploded.
That sounds very scary, I can't believe it.
This year has brought about a lot of crazy things.
I'm glad you were around to make sure that she got out OK.
Thanks Quinn, you saved my life.
You are most welcome. I knew that car was going to blow up.
We got hit really hard by that tractor trailer.
You are very lucky.
Well, those little Smart cars are pretty solid.
Look after yourself and speedy recovery.
I finished my new client Riley's job today.
What was the outcome of the job?
She loved the house. She said she hired me, because I was the best interior designer in town.
Did she have a lot of input, or did you have free reign to choose the design?
She said she trusted my vision completely.
That must have been a fun job getting to decorate a house anyway you pleased.
Riley asked me to handle the interior design of her new condo, and I think I did a great job.
Riley, the famous actress?  You designed her place?
Yep, she said she had heard that I was the best designer in town and I was the only person she came to.
That's awesome.  How did it go?  Was it perfect?
She seems to think so.  She posted on Instagram that I created the exact atmosphere she was searching for.
That's fantastic, really.  That is going to be great exposure for your business.
I designed and fitted the interior of Riley's house the way she wanted it.
I bet she was so excited when she first saw the way her house looked.
She actually started crying because it looked exactly the way she drew it up for me.
Do you think you can give me a consultation for designing my living room?
Sure, I can come over next weekend.
I am looking forward to seeing what you can do with the space!
Here is the design I made for Riley's house.
Wow, that's phenomenal.
Yes, she was quite satisfied. She wanted a cool atmosphere with a bohemian vibe, which happens to be my specialty.
Well done, I'm always impressed with your interior design work, really.
My parents are going to be so mad at me.
Is this college related?
Well, it doesn't have anything to do with grades.
What's wrong?
I told my parents I would be home for Christmas break on Friday, but now it's going to be Sunday because I was partying.
I don't think they're going to be happy with that.
I feel so bad that I was late for Christmas
Why were you late?
I just partied too much and missed my flight
Well that can happen to anyone. At least you made it!
Yeah I appreciate that. I'll make it up next year
Yeah that sounds good. I'm sure your family is still very happy to see you
I think I disappointed my family.
What did you do?
I was expected to be home on Friday for Christmas but I arrived on Sunday.
What caused the delay?
Year end partying at college.
You never run out of ways to disappoint your family.
I'm sorry I wasn't home on Friday, but there were lots of holiday parties on campus.
Was your family upset?
A little, until I told them I was staying an extra week before I go back to school.
That's great.
So I'll get to spend more one on one time with my mom.
I guess it worked out for the best.
I am only young once! I know they expected me two days ago, but I won't be in college forever!
So did you stay back at college to party, to study, or for a boy?
There were tons of parties going on, and like I said, I will only be young once!
It is Christmas time! Did you at least let someone from your family know that you wouldn't be home until Sunday?
Of course I did, but that doesn't mean they were happy about it still.
That is true, but next time, family is family.
I bought some groceries.
You really bought a lot Alex.
I just need to put them in on my car.
Be careful and take it easy.
Will do, don’t want to squash all my veggies.
Sure, Take care Alex.
The tents look great. Those were easy to set up.
Not too bad. Do you want to grab the coolers from the truck?
Oh no... I have some bad news.
No bad news during our camping trip!
No, I don't know what I was thinking. I left the food at home!
Jordan! That's the only thing you were in charge of! What are we going to do?
It was so a tough experience.
I can't believe you had to witness that.
After Lee passed away, I closed his eyes.
Wow, that must've been hard.
It was. The ambulance arrived a few minutes later but, of course, it was too late.
There's nothing they could've done anyhow.
 Do you hear that.
That was a loud noise.
Let's see what happened.
Oh no, it is a bad accident.
I'm calling ambulance.
I'll run over to see if I can help.
I made it to Dublin.
Nice! I was worried about you.
I didn't have any troubles. You have nothing to worry about.
That's good. Enjoy your vacation.
I have to tell you about my recent trip. It was a dream!
Really? Where did you go?
I finally got to go to Dublin and it was really more than I imagined.
Wow, it sounds great. What was the best part?
The entire visit was so amazing and beautiful. I can't pick one part.
I really would love to go there too. Hopefully I can one day.
I'm a very religious person and follow all of God's teachings.
So did you have fun last night at the church function?
I had an amazing night and I learned so much.
I wish my church was more like yours.
You're welcome to come by anytime.
Whenever I'm reading scripture I'm just so amazingly happy.
The world does that to people who are filled with the Holy Spirit.
It's something new to me and I'm enjoying it very much.
I'm glad you're reaping the benefits of having a relationship with God.
I'm slowly getting to where I want to be in life with God behind me at all times.
Isn't it an amazing feeling to know that you have God on your side?
Last night we had a good evening talking about God with our Bibles together in our church group.
I am glad you had a good time.
We really spend less time talking about God and more so focusing on how we can improve ourselves.
Well that does not sound nice.
Yeah, next time you should come along.
Maybe I will, I will see if I can leave work early.
I so unhappy when I have such a busy day.
It is like a rat running on the wheel.
In the big city you got to get that cheese.
Did you get everything done today?
I did but I am exhausted.
Well get a good night sleep because the rat race continues tomorrow.
I like to keep moving.  I can go places all day and not stop to catch a breather.
Some people are like that.
I like an adventurous.  I have so many places I want to go.
Have you tried hopping on a train?
One of my friends did that.  She explore the states on a train.  She says I should try that.
You should and you can sleep on a train too.
I have been all over the place and now I am so tired.
You need to take a rest.
I think I should because I've been running around all day.
Why don't we go get lunch?
I think that is a good idea.
Come with me, and I will treat you.
I went with a guy to the mall today.
Your boyfriend?
No, another guy, he's also got a girlfriend.
Was it Ok,
yes it was good, he is a good friend to my boyfriend, so I need his advice on a surprise I was getting for my boyfriend.
So glad you got this sorted.
There were so many people around. I hope no one we know saw what we were doing.
This is a small town. What were you thinking?
I wasn't thinking. I was only trying to get a surprise for my girlfriend.
You just better hope that no one saw you.
Yes, it will spoil the surprise.
You better hope that no one who knows Robert saw you either.
Fritz, maybe we should not be in the mall. There so many people I know who work here.
Don't worry, Trace. We got our masks on. No one will notice.
Oh no, there's my boyfriend .
Wait, what the hell is my girlfriend as well, 
Let's turn in there are we spoil the surprise for them.
I told the her to wear a mask when she's out
just make sure you're not late to the trip or we have to go without you
don't worry, I am sure I will be on time
I think we are all meeting around eight so make sure you have your bags packed
I will have them packed in the morning and be waiting for you guys when you get there
You know how tidy my mom can be, so I had to put a lot of things away before she got home.
How much did you have to clean up?
I had the pickles out all over the counter, so it was a whole big thing. I had to wipe up pickle juice, close the pickle jar and put everything back to where it was.
Did you manage before your mom got home?
With only a minute to spare!
The weather is really nice outside!
It is beautiful.
I want to go skiing.
That sounds fun.
Want to come with?
Sure!
It's such a perfect day to be on the slopes!
Is it? What's it like out?
Blue skies and about thirty degrees at the base.
What about wind?
Light winds. It's perfect! Get your gear ready and let's go!
Okay! Hopefully we can be first up the lift.
I have not worked out all week, do you want to go to the gym after work with me?
Sure, that sounds great.
Just make sure to bring a water bottle because their machines are broke.
Ok, I won't forget one.
I really need to relieve some stress with a good workout.
I need some workout to, has been a while since I did some excercise.
I went straight to the gym from work today.
Aren't you tired after work?
Sometimes but the workout helps wake me up and I feel good afterwards.
You're being so healthy.
I am really trying. I want to be in shape for summer.
And for health !
I stopped by the gym after work today to get in a little exercise.
That's a good habit to have. I wish my gym was on the way home from work.
It's really convenient. Don't you have a park on the way? You could take a jog there.
Yeah, I get home late and don't want to deal with the dark areas of the park after the sun sets.
Yeah, that's true. You can't be too careful if you are alone at night.
I think I'll try to jog in the morning and see how that works out. Thanks for the motivation!
I can't believe there was this big mix up about me being missing
Wait, what happened?
I decided to take by myself without my phone or anything
Oh okay that makes sense. I guess people were just worried about you
Yeah I understand, but it was still a really crazy situation
Well I'm glad you got it cleared up
I'm tired. Leaving the house at 6am to catch a flight.
Where are you flying to?
New York for a business meeting.
Enjoy the sights while you're there.
No time. I have the meeting all day, then catch a flight back late tonight.
Exhausting. They should let you stay in a hotel for just one night.
I was almost late to my plane.
Oh no. Did you sleep late?
Yes. I had to leave my house so early.
As long as you made the plane, it's fine.
hey dear, I made it to Atlanta yesterday
Whoa! how did you do it after waking up half an hour to check in time
I woke up in a huff and did not even take a shower, I just hopped into the car and away I went
...and you made it to the airport in time?
There was no traffic at that hour, so I drove like mad and got to the airport 5 minutes to the deadline
Damn Sasha! you were super lucky
I heard the funniest joke the other day, it really split my sides.
What was the joke?
Why did the chicken cross the road? To get to the other side.
That is hilarious. Who told you that?
Jim told me the joke. I was laughing so hard I had to sit down.
Jim is such a funny guy.
I heard the funniest joke today. I told myself to remember it so I could tell you.
Well, tell me. What's the joke?
I can't remember it to save my life. I had to sit down because I was laughing too hard and couldn't breathe.
And now you can't remember it?
No, I can't. Isn't that strange?
I told the most hilarious joke to my son.
Before you tell me the joke, how funny was it?
I split my sides with the joke and had to sit down to recover from the laughter.
Ok. Tell me the joke now.
I was laughing so hard that I had to sit down to recover.
You find so much joy.
My little sister, she's so cute.  She followed me to town and she had to step on my footprints.
Little Mindy?  She makes a game out of everything.
Mindy is my best friend.  We hang out all the time.
You are the best sister.
Oh my I can't stop laughing ,
Yes, that's was funny a funny joke.
Yes, everyone is looking at us because of the joke.
I did not realised how hard I laughed.
Yea me neither.
You really are a greatest friend, always know how to break the ice.
It took forever for my dad to get to the airport.
How long did you wait?
I was patient, but waited for half an hour.
Was there traffic at that time of day?
No, he said he lost track of time trying to fix the bathroom sink.
Well, at least you have a working sink after getting back home.
I am waiting for my father to arrive at the airport.
Do you know when he will arrive?
I don't know, so I am just staying here
Be patient. He will be there soon.
Hey thanks for coming with me to pick up my dad
I know you were a bit nervous, how long has it been
I haven't seen him in over twenty years
Twenty years, that's a long time
I think he finally has turned his life around
You're a good person for giving him a second chance
That was a fun trip.
Yeah, thanks for having me along.
My dad should be here soon to pick me up.
Okay, want to grab something to eat really quick?
Yeah, that sounds good.
There's a taco place that's really good right over there.
We had an office party at the local bar and grill across the street.
How exciting!
It was a wild one.
Did you take the rest of the day off?
I wish I can. I have to return to work later.
That was good break though.
I went back to work after that party last night.
The one at the local bar and grill?
Yes. It got pretty wild, and now I had more work due today.
Are you feeling alright today?
I do actually. Half the office is hung over but I got my project in and feel fine.
That's good to know!
My head hurts. How am I supposed to work?
The party a little too much for you?
I didn't think it would be so wild.
The local bar and grill can be quite the hot spot.
Don't talk so loud.
Sorry, I'll try to whisper.
I'm not feeling so great.
Too much to drink at the party? I told you to be careful.
No, it's not that. I ate some of those crab puffs and I don't know...
They weren't good?
Something tasted off. And I think now I've got a little bit of food poisoning or something.
Oh no. A lot of people had those crab puffs!
What will you lucky people be having tonight?
The special. It's our anniversary!
This is so sweet. You two must be in Love.
You bet yourself we are.
Okay. I think I know just what you need. An accompanying piano, some white wine, and a table with a view.
Hey! now we're talking.
The anniversary was great wasn't it?
Our friendship runs deep, I am so happy I got to celebrate it with you
you've been my friend for 10 years. Let's book a vacation together
I never expected Italy!
I am full of surprises
Thank you for being here for me
Hey Riley. Why are you walking on the side of the road?
Well, I got into a car accident.
Oh. No. Are you ok?
Yes, I'm ok, but my car is badly damage. I have to walk home now.
Well, I'll give you a ride home.
Thanks. I appreciate it.
I just had to give Riley a ride. She ran into an accident and lost her car.
Oh no, Glad she is alright and that you were able to give her a ride.
Me too. I had almost gone out, but at the last minute I changed my mind. So I was home when she called.
It's almost like the universe knew you needed to be home.
Exactly. It's so weird how the universe works that way some times.
I kind of love when stuff like that happens.
You want a ride friend?
Yes please, if it is alright with you.
The accident look rough.
It really was.
Call me anytime, if you need anything
I really appreciate this.
I am ready to get out there and win.
You sound pretty confident.
I am.  I have practiced and practiced for months.  I am ready to get out there and play some basketball.
I hope your team wins the game today.
Oh, I know we are going to win.  I am ready.
I've been practicing for months and today's the day.
What's today?
Basketball try outs. I'm ready to play!
I'm sure all your hard work will pay off.
At least I'll know one way or the other today.
I think you'll make the team.
It took me at least an hour of wandering around before I found the carpark again.  In the dark, I lost my barings.
Were you drunk?
I wasn't drunk, I guess I was tired.
That explains it.  What were you doing out?
Camping with my boyfriend on our anniversary.
That's a nice term for it.
I couldn't breathe, so Bailey threw my head back to perform CPR on me.
When did this happen?
It was during a marathon. I fell down and was having issues breathing.  Bailey is a paramedic.
Was Bailey running with you?
He was right behind me.  He saw me collapse.
That might have been so frightening.
I think I am having a hard time breathing
okay just relax and le t me tilt your head  back, and I can clear your airway
okay let me just lie still for awhile
I'm going to perform CPR on you so I can keep your heart in rythm
Bailey saved my life today.
You almost died?
I think so, I couldn't breathe.
What did he do to help?
Bailey was there and gave me CPR.
Wow, you owe Bailey a lot.
I really needed to get to the front of the line!
Yeah, we came at the busiest time to go get concert tickets!
I knew that before but I didn't think that her tour would be that popular.
Of course it is, she is the most popular artist of our time!
Let's keep moving to the front of the ticket line and keep pace.
Yes, I can't wait to see her concert!
I don't know why they had to arrest me!
You pushed your way to front and knocked that old lady down.
Sorry, I was so excited and wanted to be the first to buy the new phone.
There weren't that many people in line really.
I know, but I have got to go back and get that phone first.
They banned you from the property remember.
I had a crazy day at the store.
What did you do??
I had to make sure that I was in line early enough for the new video game coming out. So I pushed through a lot of people.
Were you able to get the video game?
I did. It turns out all those people were there for a flu vaccination.
So you pushed your way through a crowd of senior citizens?
I was really worried about what I would eat at the barbeque yesterday.
I understand, being a vegan can be difficult when everyone around you is eating meat.
I brought a veggie tray and there was roasted corn on the cob that was delicious.
The veggie tray was a smart idea, I usually bring some type of fruit salad.
The good thing is that the host told me the menu ahead of time so I was able to add something for vegans.
I know, there is nothing worse than people asking why you aren't eating when you don't eat any of the food they have.
I got taken to a barbeque today and was really nervous about the food.
Did they have anything for you to eat?
Yes, I'm totally vegan now so I was so worried about having enough.
Yeah a barbeque is usually a lot of animal products.
They had tons of roasted vegetables and I wound up with plenty on my plate.
Oh good for you; I'm glad people are more aware of not eating too much meat to safe the animals.
I don't eat meat. I'm vegan. Not sue what there is here for me to eat.
It is a barbeque. That usually involves meat.
Look, there's a table with a salad and some corn on the cob.
I want some chicken though. Go get your vegetables and meet me at the table.
I really don't want to smell your chicken.
 Alright let me try to be a vegan starting today, for the sake of the animals .
I majorly embarrassed myself today.
What happened?
My sister's wedding was today and I let the photographer take pictures of me with barbecue sauce all over my face after I ate some ribs.
Aw, that's not too bad. You'll be able to laugh about it in a year.
I hope so. I must have looked ridiculous wearing a tuxedo with sauce all over my chin. I wiped it off after my brother told me but it must have been there for at least half an hour.
If it makes you feel better, I got a period stain on my bridesmaid dress last year.
There were no napkins at all and I had barbecue sauce all over my face, so I pulled a napkin out of my pocket!
I can't believe they served messy barbecue at a formal wedding.
I know, and then without napkins as well!
Maybe the catering service just forgot to put them out.
More likely, the bride just didn't want to pay for anything else!
you're probably right.
Let me clean up your face, hoe did you get so messy.
I know, but ribs are always a messy food.
You are at a wedding make, please make sure that you are watching how you eat.
Thanks, I love ribs I want to make sure that I am getting some.
I went to my sister's wedding last weekend.
I forgot about her getting married, How did that go?
It was good, but who has ribs at a formal wedding and only gives one napkin to wipe your face with.
You could have used the tablecloth to wipe your face.
Those ribs were delicious!
You ate the entire plate without stopping!
Those were the best ribs that I ever had in my life!
You have evidence to prove it, all over your face!
Yes, and I am not at all embarresed by it.
You are very funny Ash.
I'm working on a motor in the garage for my car. I was wondering if you could help.
 I love to help, but why do you think I know about this?
You seem to know more about motors than I do.
Sorry I do not know much about motors?
The driveway at your house has a lot of cars that you're repairing.
Didn't you realize that the reason I haven't fixed them is because I'm not good with motors?
Hi! I've been working on the motor on my car and I'm having a problem with it, maybe you could help?
Sure, I'll try, I'm pretty good at fixing cars, what's the problem?
I'm trying to replace the EGR valve, my car computer said that's the problem.
Wow, that's a little more than I know, you might want to try looking it up on YouTube.
Great idea! Why didn't I think of that?
I don't know, maybe you were too frustrated, let me know if that helps! Later, friend
I had too much to drink after my breakup.
What was your alcohol of choice?
Five beers in the morning.
Do you have anything important to do today?
Not really relative to what happened.
I think that breakup might be messing with your perspective.
My boyfriend broke up with me today.  I am just going to drown myself in beer.
Drink away your sorrow.
It helps, at least for a while.
Just don't let it get out of control.
I am already feel like I am an alcoholic.
Please watch out.
 I can't believe he broke up with me.
It was coming. You guys have been fighting for months.
To breakup with me on my birthday! He couldn't have waited a day?
I got you taxi. I am taking your keys, You can't drive like this.
I have a gift for you. Want to open it?
Wow, two tickets to Hawaii.
I thought we'd go on a trip to celebrate your college graduation.
I'm so excited! I've always wanted to go to Hawaii, but it's so expensive.
You deserve it for all your hard work.
I need to go home and pack!
I got you something for graduating college
that's so nice but you didn't really have to
well, your my girlfriend, and I want to treat you nice
you're the nicest boyfriend i have ever had in my life
I think we should clean this room up, since dad seems really angry
I think that's a good idea because he said he would ground me if I didn't
let's start with everything under the bed and work over here
I will get the closet cleaned out and then sweep it
I threw Jan's trash away so we wouldn't get grounded
did she forget again?
she just doesn't care and I personally don't want to get grounded again
doing your chores is important
I wish she understood that
she's such a free spirit
It sucks that I had to break my word, because it's not something I want to do often.
Look, you can't beat yourself up too much.
I just want to make sure that I do everything right, and not mess myself up in the future.
That's why you breaking your word is something that had to happen.
I cannot stretch yourself then when I need to concentrate on this.
Exactly, so you did the right thing.
I decided to not go ahead and help you out with getting the team back together.
Wait why not help me?
I can't take the pressure from everyone with picking the best players and people getting mad at me.
I mean I understand, but I thought we were in this together.
I know, I realize this is a bad move on my part, and I am sorry.
I just wish there was something I could do to change your mind is all.
I just couldn't seem to keep the lie going any longer to her
so you told her that you cheated on her with Brian
I knew she was going to find out soon
I'm sure she would since everyone was talking about it
time to stop drinking alcohol I guess
Whew, I hope my Amazon package comes soon. I have to get to my parents house first thing.
They be home at any time, we need to hurry.
Maybe I should have sent the gifts directly to their house.
Yes, but that's silly, because I think you need to wrap them up before given this to your parents.
I guess I did not put much thought into this.
Just get them an Amazon gift card. That works!
I did not have time to buy gifts for anyone. So I just got something for my parents.
You went shopping just for them?
I didn't even go shopping. I just picked something on Amazon.
Is it's something they will like?
It's a ring doorbell. I'll have to install it but they'll use it.
Do your parents even have internet?
Most of the time I'm actually late, but this was one of the few times I arrived early.
I'm glad you're getting more punctual.
The problem is the drive was actually longer than I expected. That was the whole reason I arrived five minutes early!
Better to be too early than too late.
I wrote down everything the students needed in order to study for their exam.
I have no doubt that you are fully competent.
I just hope my students appreciate all the hard work and sacrifice.
They are more than proud to have a wonderful teacher like you Jesse.
You are very kind.
I only spoke the truth.
I wrote the assignment on the board in large letters so that students in the back can see it clearly.
Your classroom is kind of big.
Yes and packed.  I have too many students in my class.
That's the problem with school these days.  The classes are overcrowded.
We need more funding for education.
I support you on that.
Ok, Math test is due tomorrow.
Is that it?
Yea, just the test.
Is it open notes?
Yes, it is.
Perfect!
I have to write my students homework very big on the board.
Why? They are in high school, not elementary school.
They don't register when I announce it. I have to write it down.
It seems like they need to take their own responsibility.
I am trying to teach them that, but I would hate for them all to fail.
Maybe you should let them fail, to teach them a lesson.
Tomorrow you all have to write number 5 essay from your text book.
Which one is that?
Here it is in all Capital letters reading PRONOUNS AND ADJECTIVES
Oh, those are hard.
If you are needing any help with those, be sure to read the examples in the chapter.
 We will do, sir.
I am going to Don and Anna's wedding this weekend, I can't wait
I love weddings, do you know what you're wearing yet?
Almost, I am down to two options, my blue dress with the ornate belt or the low cut red dress
I personally think the blue one looks better on you, the red one is a little risky for a wedding
True, decision is made, blue dress it is, thanks for your input!
I hope you have a great time!
How do you like my dress?
I think it look great on you.
Thanks. I was deciding on between the blue or red dress.
What made you choose this one?
I thought that the blue dress was more appropriate the venue has a lot of blue flowers.
I think you're right.
I am so glad I decided to pop out with this really cute outfit
yeah I know, that dress is nothing short of amazing
I was going to go with the red dress, but I decided blue at the last minute
I think that is a great choice
yeah it really was.  I am glad it worked out
me too!
I kept debating which dress to wear to the wedding.
That's a tough choice. Did you decide on one?
Yes, I ultimately decided on the blue dress.
That's awesome! I'm really glad that you found one.
Me too! It was a great choice.
Great! I'm glad that you liked it.
I don't know which dress to wear to the wedding.
Which one do you like the most?
I like both, just can't decide whether to go with red or blue.
I think you should chose the best one for the weeding.
Thanks, I'm going with the blue wedding dress.
Great, that one looks very nice on you.
I got a good night sleep last night.  I have studied for the exams too so I feel pretty confident I would do well.
Preparation gives you that confident.  How did you end up doing?
The tests were too difficult but they were thorough.  It covered most of the topics we studied this semester.
When will you get your tests back?
I think sometime next week I should find out my grades.  That really depends on the instructors.
I am sure you did well.
I feel so good today. I'm ready for the exam, how about you?
I'm ok. Why are you feeling so good?
I studied at a good pace and didn't have to cram. I feel refreshed and confident today.
I need you to start studying with me so that I don't cram at the last minute.
We can definitely do that next time. I'm sending you positive vibes today though.
Same to you Skylar. Knock that test out girl.
I'm finally feeling good about these exams. I've been working hard and studying and I managed do get to bed at a decent hour. I'm going to ace these exams.
That's awesome. You've really worked hard. I wish I felt as confident as you. I'm still sweating.
We still have some time. Maybe I can help you study.
I'd really like that. We should go somewhere we can concentrate.
We could meet outside the library. It's near the exam hall and quiet.
That sounds like a great plan. Let's go. They even have some comfortable chairs in the alcove where we won't be bothered.
I'm confident I will pass my exams.
We've been studying really hard. And we got some sleep last night.
I'm going to eat a healthy breakfast, maybe some scrambled eggs, then head of to take my first exam.
I'll meet you in the dining hall. Scrambled eggs sound good.
I can order for you. Do you want anything else?
Avocado would be perfect!
You know that I teach geography at the secondary school?
Yes, I have ben told.
Well I'm having the kids use pins to represent all the different places on the world map.
Oh that sounds fun.
Yeah I just love seeing their little minds expand.
It is nice to you helping them shaping their futures!
Ok class today we are going to learn about countries. Does anyone know the name of our country?
Yes, we live in America.
Good job. Take this pin and pin it on America over there on the map.
Ok, I found America on the map.
Does anyone know the name of a different country?
I know the name of a country and it's Russia.
Hey so my favorite song, Sorry came on the radio.
Oh yes, I love that song and him as well.
I started singing in front of everyone and they were laughing at my voice.
I'm sorry, most of those guys are jerks anyways.
Yes, I don't care because I just love singing so much.
Don't worry about their opinions, as they only wish they could sing themselves.
Oh my goodness I had the most embarrassing moment today.
Tell me, what happened.
So you know that song I love?
Oh yes.
Well I literally sang it at the top of my lungs and everyone laughed at me.
Sorry to hear this.
I love to sing.
You sing like a frog.
I know, I have a very poor singing voice.
It is the worst.
We were in the car and my favorite song came on the radio so I began to sing the song and everyone laughed at me.
Were you expecting anything different?
I don't understand why Cameron wasn't in a seat, when he said he was.
So the seats were just empty?
Yes, plus the show is about to start.
So they lied to you, when they sent you that text about where they were.
Yes, Cameron lied to me.
What are you going to do about it?
There is a seat that is empty and clearly claimed to be yours
There are a lot of empty seats here too but thank you for getting me one
Of course.  I know that the show starts soon, and I think its great they have reservations
Yeah.  Its actually pretty funny I was in the seat, but I don't think you saw me
Oh really? Wow that is something
Yes it is
Where do we keep the first-aid kit?
What happened? There are bandages in the bathroom, below the sink.
Thanks. I hurt my knee riding Jesse's bike. I don't think it's the sturdiest bike.
Maybe use a different one next time.
One of these days, I'm going to be able to say I'm bilingual. Sasha's teaching me her home language.
How is it going? Are you picking it up?
I think so. I still having trouble with reading and writing but I can speak it pretty well.
When I was learning Spanish, it was easier to learn to speak first and then the other stuff.
You're probably right. I think I might be overloading myself.
I had fun learning Spanish.
It must have been hard to learn.
Not really, I watched Spanish soap operas.
Did Sasha show you which ones to watch?
Yes, she has good taste.
I need to watch those sometime.
Can I come over and swim in your pool?
My dad is cleaning it.
I am so bored and I don't know what to do with myself.
You could start on your summer reading list for freshman English next year.
Yes, and I can also roll around in a pig's sty but neither of those are things I want to be doing.
Well, figure it out for yourself. I'm busy.
It's so hot today.
Summer has been brutal this year.
I'm so bored.
Do you have any ideas about what to do?
No, I'm feeling lazy due to the heat.
I think laying around is a good use of time.
I was very bored.
Have no idea to pass the time.
Let's play baseball.
That's true.
 Do you want to come over?
Yes, that's great.
I'm so scared of the police investigating me. How am I going to get out of it?
I don't think you can.
But I can't lie! I'll go to jail!
I'm sure if you help them out and give them the info they need maybe they will help you out as well
I've heard that never works.
You need to cooperate,  it's worth it!
Carson was at the park today.
Wow weird, how did you feel about that?
Well, he still doesn't know that my son is his kid.
Did he see your son?
Yes, but he didn't say anything about it, and we left afterwards.
 I can't even imagine being in that situation.
Carson told me about Quinn's game.
Does Carson coach Quinn at baseball?
Yes, but Carson was just at the park with his kids and saw Quinn playing basketball.
Was he still keeping score in his head as a coach.
Yes, and rooting for Quinn to win.
How does Quinn's shooting compare to his striking?
It was really nice of Carson to let his kids play basketball with my kid.
How did that happen?
Carson was at the park with his kids and saw that my son was playing ball.
Your son was by himself?
Yes. So Carson had his kids come over and play with him.
That was a really nice gesture.
Taylor used my favorite expression.  I looked at him and smiled.
That's sweet.
He's the kindest guy I've ever been with.
You two are perfect together.
Sometimes it feels like we are the same person.  We are so in sync.
That's so cool.
Addison is a huge Led Zeppelin fan. He knows all their original release albums on vinyl.
That is quite impressive. Do you like Led Zeppelin.
I am a huge classic rock fan. We hang out over the weekend and listened to the records.
That sounds like fun.
I listened to vinyl records with Addison all weekend.
Wow, you guys must really love music.
We do. It's amazing how we love the same kind of music like classic rock.
I had no idea Addison was into that.
She has all the Led Zeppelin original release albums.
You guys are made to be friends.
You know how much I love classic rock and vinyl records. Addison and I listened to her Led Zeppelin albums all weekend!
That had to be so much fun!!
It really was. Led Zeppelin is one of my favorites, so it was awesome listening to all of the music.
I could easily listen to my favorite band all weekend like that.
Definitely. Even after listening to it all weekend, I could do it again!!
Maybe we'll have to do the same thing some time!
Addison had every original release of Led Zeppelin.  I was vinyl records and classic rock so I decided to stay at Addison's house and listen to his records all weekend.
That sounds like a great weekend.
We also went fishing with his father.
I didn't know you fish.
I don't fish.  Addison and his father caught the fish.  They cooked it for dinner and I ate it.
Was it good?.
Jesse is a true friend.
How long have you known Jesse?
We have known each other for a very long time.
No that is what you call true friendship.
We are lucky to have each other.
A friend is truly a blessing.
Why wasn't Jesse invited to the going away party?
Oh I don't think he likes Jesse too much
I wonder why, he's such a great guy, I have know him since I was 2 years old!
I think Jesse and him got into at school over a girl
Oh yes, I remember that, well that's a shame, I think Jesse is pretty cool
Me too, maybe he'll be invited next time
Jesse is a really nice guy. I think you will like to meet him.
He seems nice.
He is. I've know him all my life.
Well, I trust you. So I think we're going have a great time hanging out.
I really hope you guys can become friends.
So do I.
I read through the article and thought it was a good but flawed analysis by Riley.
That's interesting as I thought Riley expressed her thoughts very well.
She has great points in what she wrote, but it misses some of the major facts about climate change.
I can see that as she did not spell out the economic drag on things.
I also thought she was very poised with her opinions on how effective our current solutions are.
That is true and think she will defend her position regardless of what others think.
There is not a lot of stuff going on these days and I wanted to show everyone Riley's perspective
yeah it is crazy seeing how big a difference the writer has made putting their perspective into place
yeah riley sure is a smart person
I agree, that thorough analysis is amazing
it really is.  thanks for the help
no problem
I gave the reader a thorough analysis of Riley's perspective in my most recent publication.
Where was it published?
In a literary magazine that reviews books by upcoming writers.
Riley is such a talented writer.
She has the ability to transform the reader into another world.
That's what most good writers do.
I feel that I did a superb job analyzing Riley's perspective.
I concur, you have such a unique and ingenious talent.
Well, I have been writing articles for a very long time and it's natural.
I love reading your article's and was impressed regarding what you wrote about Riley.
Thank you, it takes great experience to write such a detailed analysis.
I commend you for your work.
I represented Tracy in in court the other day.  I felt bad for her, being blamed for something she didn't do.
That was nice of you to represent her.  How did it go?
Fortunately I was able to show enough doubt that she was guilty that she wasn't convicted.
I bet that was a relief.
Yes, for both of us.  I would have felt horrible if I hadn't been able to get her off.
I'm glad for both of you that you were.
I had a case today for a theft that my client insists she did not commit.
How did the trial go?
The judge dismissed the case. Apparently, someone else admitted to the theft.
Wow! How lucky! It must have been horrifying for Tracy.
you know tracy was in court for a theft she didn't commit
seriously! i hope you helped her with the case?
yes i argued her case
how did it go, i mean the case
woof, woof I'm a dog
Carson, you can pretend to be a dog, but please, don't lick
but that's what doggies do
well not kid dogs
ok sorry
its ok its just not good for you
I just got adopted by the best family ever!
Yes, it's always great being adopted by a nice family
It's great because there are kids who are going to love to play with me
You'll definitely never get bored!
I met the youngest kid, I made sure to lick his face
It sounds like the family is lucky to have you!
Riley made me feel so creeped out the other day.
Riley? She is usually so calm and friendly.
Yeah, well apparently she thought I had slighted her and she was acting like a wild animal wanting to hurt me.
What do you mean?
She was staring me down with glowing eyes like a wolf!
That is creepy. It doesn't sound like her at all!
I'm scared of Riley.
But Riley's so nice he wouldn't hurt a fly.
No, Riley thought I had slighted him, and he gave me the creepiest look.
What kind of look did he give you?
He was staring at me directly with his eyes glowing.
You must have been imagining that.
I need fuel so badly.
I know this dessert has no gas stations
Yes, if we don't get some soon it will be dangerous.
There's a gas station.
Finally.
I'm so glad we finally found a gas station. I was worried we were going be stranded on the side of the road.
You've got to be careful driving these long stretches of desert. It's easy to run out of gas or get an overheated radiator.
Why would the radiator overheat? This is a brand new Lexus!
Going 80 miles an hour when it's 110 degrees outside is asking for trouble.
Well that's why I bought a nice new car- so we don't have to worry about anything breaking down.
Well don't forget you still got to put gas in it!
There is no law that can keep me down and prevent me from living my life to the fullest.
Don't you think that you live a dangerous life, with all the things you do?
If I get caught by the cops or die doing something crazy, at least I lived a full life.
Whatever helps you sleep at night.
Look, I want to be free of this society and want everyone to be as free as me.
So basically you want the country to turn into an anarchist state where nothing matters.
I'm a law breaker and trouble maker.
I'm going to defy laws with you too.
You are an angry person.
Yes, we got issues.
Yes we do.
It's going to be bad.
I have to stop being so bad
How are you bad?
I'm a trouble maker and a law breaker, I defy all laws. I think I'm above laws.
Whoa, that sounds crazy.
It seems like everyone is getting fed up with my pranks.
Some of them are too stuck up to enjoy themselves.
I know, it's like no one wants to have a great laugh.
You can save your pranks for us this weekend as well enjoy them more.
I'm just practicing on these guys and working out some last-minute kinks.
So your co-workers are like the crash test dummy for pranks?
With all the changes at work last month, I had to develop a brand new schedule for everyone at the office.
Really?  Was it a lot of work?
Kind of, it took me almost a full day.  And I had to build it from the ground up.
How do all the workers like the new schedule?
After I spent all day working on it, I announced the changes at the end of the day.  Some people loved it, but a couple of employees got angry and quit that same day.
That's too bad.  But I'm still looking for a job and I would love to work with you at your office.
The schedule needs to be revamped.  I announced the new schedule to everyone at the meeting.
Why did you need to change it?
A couple of things came up and we need more time to work on the projects.
More time is a good thing.
The staff was relieved.  They were feeling the pressure of the tight deadlines.
No one likes the stress.
I think I need to hire a chef.
Why? Cooking is so easy.
I don't even know how to make ice. I burnt the water for it.
Huh? If you actually burnt the water then maybe you're right.
I cannot cook.
Who told you that?
Nobody has to tell me.
What is wrong with your cooking?
I am the only person who can burn water and ruin a recipe for ice.
You definitely cannot cook.
Open up the present I got you.
Oh my god, this is great! I've always wanted to write with these!
The ink wasn't included with the quill, but I bought it separately so you could use it right away.
Thanks so much, Kendall! I'll use the ink while writing in my journal tonight.
I know John wanted a quill for his birthday, do you think he needs an ink well with it too?
I'm not sure if he has one, but you do need it to be able to write with the quill right?
Well yeah, of course.
I should get one on the safe site.
Yes, I guess so, hope he likes it.
I'm sure he'll love it.
Sasha decided to show up to the funeral today.
Seriously? She never seemed to care about him when he was alive.
I agree. She was always shady and played both sides of everything.
I dislike people like that, were you nice to her?
I was cordial, but I made sure not to stick around to have a conversation with her.
Yes, I don't think I would have been able to contain myself from shouting at her.
So now you show me respect Sasha? I see how it is.
I know, I'm sorry. I took you for granted while they were alive.
Well it's nice to hear that even though he is dead.
I will learn my lesson from this and not take anyone for granted anymore.
That's good Sasha. I'm glad you've learned your lesson.
 Thanks for not doing that.
Cameron just had a baby.  She was so excited to announce her birth when I got to her place.
That's so exciting.
This is her first child so she's just overjoyed.
Are you guys having a party to celebrate the birth?
Cameron wants some time to bond with the baby, and recover from her childbirth.  Maybe in month or two, they are throwing a party.
Child birth can be difficult.
When my mom had me, she was so excited.
Wouldn't every mom be excited?
Yes, but she literally announced it to the world! She went door to door in her neighborhood, plus she called everyone. It was crazy!
What a story. I bet you blushed when she told you that one.
She didn't. I had to find out from dad since she's so embarrassed about it!
That makes it even better. Honestly, though, there's nothing wrong with a proud first-time mom.
